Chapter VI
The Executive
==================================================

Chapter VI
The Executive
Part I
Federal Executive
A - The President of the Federation
130. (1) There shall be for the Federation a President.
(2) The President shall be the Head of State, the Chief Executive of the Federation and
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Federation.
131. A person shall be qualified for election to the office of the President if -

(a) he is a citizen of Nigeria by birth;
(b) he has attained the age of forty years;
(c) he is a member of a political party and is sponsored by that political party; and
(d) he has been educated up to at least School Certificate level or its equivalent.
132. (1) An election to the office of President shall be held on a date to be appointed by the
Independent National Electoral Commission.
(2) An election to the said office shall be held on a date not earlier than sixty days and not
later than thirty days before the expiration of the term of office of the last holder of that
office.
(3) Where in an election to the office of President one of the two or more candidates
nominated for the election is the only candidate after the close of nomination, by reason of
the disqualification, withdrawal, incapacitation, disappearance or death of the other
candidates, the Independent National Electoral Commission shall extend the time for
nomination.
(4) For the purpose of an election to the office of President, the whole of the Federation
shall be regarded as one constituency.
(5) Every person who is registered to vote at an election of a member of a legislative house
shall be entitled to vote at an election to the office of President.
133. A candidate for an election to the office of President shall be deemed to have been
duly elected to such office where, being the only candidate nominated for the election (a) he has a majority of YES votes over NO votes cast at the election; and
(b) he has not less than one-quarter of the votes cast at the election in each of at least twothirds of all the States in the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
134. (1) A candidate for an election to the office of President shall be deemed to have be
been duly elected, where, there being only two candidates for the election (a) he has the majority of votes cast at the election; and
(b) he has not less than one-quarter of the votes cast at the election in each of at least twothirds of all the States in the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
(2) A candidate for an election to the office of President shall be deemed to have been duly
elected where, there being more than two candidates for the election(a) he has the highest number of votes cast at the election;
and

(b) he has not less than one-quarter of the votes cast at the election each of at least twothirds of all the States in the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
(3) In a default of a candidate duly elected in accordance with subsection (2) of this section
their shall be a second election in accordance with subsection (4) of this section at which
the only candidate shall be (a) the candidate who scored the highest number of votes at any election held in
accordance with the said subsection (2) of this section; and
(b) one among the remaining candidates who has a majority of votes in the highest number
of States, so however that where there are more than one candidate with majority of votes
in the highest number of States, the candidate among them with the highest total of votes
cast at the election shall be the second candidate for the election.
(4) In default of a candidate duly elected under the foregoing subsections, the Independent
National Electoral Commission shall within seven days of the result of the election held
under the said subsections, arrange for an election between the two candidates and a
candidate at such election shall be deemed elected to the office of President if (a) he has a majority of votes cast at the election; and
(b) he has not less than one-quarter of the votes cast at the election in each of at least twothirds of all the States in the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
(5) In default of a candidate duly elected under subsection (4) of this section, the
Independent National Electoral Commission shall, within seven days of the result of the
election held under the aforesaid subsection (4), arrange for another election between the
two candidates to which the subsection relates and a candidate at such election shall be
deemed to have been duly elected to the office of President, if he has a majority of the
votes cast at the election.
135. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, a person shall hold the office of
President until (a) when his successor in office takes the oath of that office;
(b) he dies whilst holding such office; or
(c) the date when his resignation from office takes effect;
or
(d) he otherwise ceases to hold office in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, the President shall vacate his
office at the expiration of a period of four years commencing from the date, when (a) in the case of a person first elected as President under this Constitution, he took the
Oath of Allegiance and the oath of office; and

(b) in any other case, the person last elected to that office under this Constitution took the
Oath of Allegiance and oath of office or would, but for his death, have taken such Oaths.
(3) If the Federation is at war in which the territory of Nigeria is physically involved and the
President considers that it is not practicable to hold elections, the National Assembly may by
resolution extend the period of four years mentioned in subsection (2) of this section from
time to time; but no such extension shall exceed a period of six months at any one time.
136. (1) If a person duly elected as President dies before taking and subscribing the Oath
of Allegiance and oath of office, or is for any reason whatsoever unable to be sworn in, the
person elected with him as Vice-President shall be sworn in as President and he shall
nominate a new Vice-President who shall be appointed by the President with the approval
by a simple majority of the National Assembly at a joint sitting.
(2) Where the persons duly elected as President and Vice President die or are unable for any
reason whatsoever to assume office before the inauguration of the National Assembly, the
Independent National Electoral Commission shall immediately conduct an election for a
President and the Vice-President.
137. (1) A person shall not be qualified for election to the office of President if (a) subject to the provisions of section 28 of this Constitution, he has voluntarily acquired
the citizenship of a country other than Nigeria or, except in such cases as may be prescribed
by the National Assembly, he has made a declaration of allegiance to such other country; or
(b) he has been elected to such office at any two previous elections; or
(c) under the law in any part of Nigeria, he is adjudged to be a lunatic or otherwise declared
to be of unsound mind;
or
(d) he is under a sentence of death imposed by any competent court of law or tribunal in
Nigeria or a sentence of imprisonment or fine for any offence involving dishonesty or fraud
(by whatever name called) or for any other offence, imposed on him by any court or
tribunal or substituted by a competent authority for any other sentence imposed on him by
such a court or tribunal; or
(e) within a period of less than ten years before the date of the election to the office of
President he has been convicted and sentenced for an offence involving dishonesty or he
has been found guilty of the contravention of the Code of Conduct; or
(f) he is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt
under any law in force in Nigeria or any other country; or
(g) being a person employed in the civil or public service of the Federation or of any State,
he has not resigned, withdrawn or retired from the employment at least thirty days before
the date of the election; or
(h) he is a member of any secret society; or

(i) he has been indicted for embezzlement or fraud by a Judicial Commission of Inquiry or
an Administrative Panel of Inquiry or a Tribunal set up under the Tribunals of Inquiry Act, a
Tribunals of Inquiry Law or any other law by the Federal or State Government which
indictment has been accepted by the Federal or State Government, respectively; or
(j) he has presented a forged certificate to the Independent National Electoral Commission.
(2) Where in respect of any person who has been (a) adjudged to be a lunatic;
(b) declared to be of unsound mind;
(c) sentenced to death or imprisonment; or
(d) adjudged or declared bankrupt
(e) any appeal against the decision is pending in any court of law in accordance with any
law in force in Nigeria, subsection (1) of this section shall not apply during a period
beginning from the date when such appeal is lodged and ending on the date when the
appeal is finally determined or, as the case may be, the appeal lapses or is abandoned,
whichever is earlier.
138. The President shall not, during his tenure of office, hold any other executive office or
paid employment in any capacity whatsoever.
139. The National Assembly shall by an Act make provisions as respects (a) persons who may apply to the Court of Appeal for the determination of any question as
to whether;
(i) any person has been validly elected to the office of President or Vice-President
(ii) the term of office of the President or Vice President has cease, or
(iii) the office of the President or Vice-President has become vacant
(b) circumstances and manner in which, and the conditions upon which such application
may be made; and
(c) powers, practice and procedure of the Court of Appeal in relation to any such
application.
140. (1) A person elected to the office of President shall not begin to perform the functions
of that office until he has declared his assets and liabilities as prescribed in this Constitution
and he has taken and subscribed the Oath of Allegiance and the oath of office prescribed in
the Seventh Schedule to this Constitution.
(2) The oaths aforesaid shall be administered by the Chief Justice of Nigeria or the person
for the time being appointed to exercise the functions of that office.

141. There shall be for the Federation a Vice-President.
142. (1) In any election to which the foregoing provisions of this Part of this Chapter relate,
a candidate for an election to the office of President shall not be deemed to be validly
nominated unless he nominates another candidate as his associate from the same political
party for his running for the office of President, who is to occupy the office of Vice-President
and that candidate shall be deemed to have been duly elected to the office of Vice-President
if the candidate for an election to the office of President who nominated him as such
associate is duly elected as President in accordance with the provisions aforesaid.
(2) The provisions of this Part of this Chapter relating to qualification for election, tenure of
office, disqualification, declaration of assets and liabilities and oaths of President shall apply
in relation to the office of Vice-President as if references to President were references to
Vice-President.
143. (1) The President or Vice-President may be removed from office in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
(2) Whenever a notice of any allegation in writing signed by not less than one-third of the
members of the National Assembly:(a) is presented to the President of the Senate;
(b) stating that the holder of the office of President or Vice-President is guilty of gross
misconduct in the performance of the functions of his office, detailed particulars of which
shall be specified,
the President of the Senate shall within seven days of the receipt of the notice cause a copy
thereof to be served on the holder of the office and on each member of the National
Assembly, and shall also cause any statement made in reply to the allegation by the holder
of the office to be served on each member of the National Assembly.
(3) Within fourteen days of the presentation of the notice to the President of the Senate
(whether or not any statement was made by the holder of the office in reply to the
allegation contained in the notice) each House of the National Assembly shall resolve by
motion without any debate whether or not the allegation shall be investigated.
(4) A motion of the National Assembly that the allegation be investigated shall not be
declared as having been passed, unless it is supported by the votes of not less than twothirds majority of all the members of each House of the National Assembly.
(5) Within seven days of the passing of a motion under the foregoing provisions, the Chief
Justice of Nigeria shall at the request of the President of the Senate appoint a Panel of
seven persons who in his opinion are of unquestionable integrity, not being members of any
public service, legislative house or political party, to investigate the allegation as provide in
this section.
(6) The holder of an office whose conduct is being investigated under this section shall have
the right to defend himself in person and be represented before the Panel by legal
practitioners of his own choice.

(7) A Panel appointed under this section shall (a) have such powers and exercise its functions in accordance with such procedure as may
be prescribed by the National Assembly; and
(b) within three months of its appointment report its findings to each House of the National
Assembly.
(8) Where the Panel reports to each House of the National Assembly that the allegation has
not been proved, no further proceedings shall be taken in respect of the matter.
(9) Where the report of the Panel is that the allegation against the holder of the office has
been proved, then within fourteen days of the receipt of the report at the House the
National Assembly shall consider the report, and if by a resolution of each House of the
National Assembly supported by not less than two-thirds majority of all its members, the
report of the Panel is adopted, then the holder of the office shall stand removed from office
as from the date of the adoption of the report.
(10) No proceedings or determination of the Panel or of the National Assembly or any
matter relating thereto shall be entertained or questioned in any court.
(11) In this section "gross misconduct" means a grave violation or breach of the provisions of this Constitution
or a misconduct of such nature as amounts in the opinion of the National Assembly to gross
misconduct.
144. (1) The President or Vice-President shall cease to hold office, if (a) by a resolution passed by two-thirds majority of all the members of the executive
council of the Federation it is declared that the President or Vice-President is incapable of
discharging the functions of his office; and
(b) the declaration is verified, after such medical examination as may be necessary, by a
medical panel established under subsection (4) of this section in its report to the President
of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
(2) Where the medical panel certifies in the report that in its opinion the President or VicePresident is suffering from such infirmity of body or mind as renders him permanently
incapable of discharging the functions of his office, a notice thereof signed by the President
of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall be published in the
Official Gazette of the Government of the Federation.
(3) The President or Vice-President shall cease to hold office as from the date of publication
of the notice of the medical report pursuant to subsection (2) of this section.
(4) the medical panel to which this section relates shall be appointed by the President of the
Senate, and shall comprise five medical practitioners in Nigeria:(a) one of whom shall be the personal physician of the holder of the office concerned; and

(b) four other medical practitioners who have, in the opinion of the President of the Senate,
attained a high degree of eminence in the field of medicine relative to the nature of the
examination to be conducted in accordance with the foregoing provisions.
(5) In this section, the reference to "executive council of the Federation" is a reference to
the body of Ministers of the Government of the Federation, howsoever called, established by
the President and charged with such responsibilities for the functions of government as the
President may direct.
145. Whenever the President transmits to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of
the House of Representatives a written declaration that he is proceeding on vacation or that
he is otherwise unable to discharge the functions of his office, until he transmits to them a
written declaration to the contrary such functions shall be discharged by the Vice-President
as Acting President.
146. (1) The Vice-President shall hold the office of President if the office of President
becomes vacant by reason of death or resignation, impeachment, permanent incapacity or
the removal of the President from office for any other reason in accordance with section 143
of this Constitution.
(2) Where any vacancy occurs in the circumstances mentioned in subsection (1) of this
section during a period when the office of Vice-President is also vacant, the President of the
Senate shall hold the office of President for a period of not more than three months, during
which there shall be an election of a new President, who shall hold office for the unexpired
term of office of the last holder of the office.
(3) Where the office of Vice-President becomes vacant:(a) by reason of death or resignation, impeachment, permanent incapacity or removal in
accordance with section 143 or 144 of this Constitution;
(b) by his assumption of the office of President in accordance with subsection (1) of this
section; or
(c) for any other reason,
the President shall nominate and, with the approval of each House of the National
Assembly, appoint a new Vice-President.
147. (1) There shall be such offices of Ministers of the Government of the Federation as
may be established by the President.
(2) Any appointment to the office of Minister of the Government of the Federation shall, if
the nomination of any person to such office is confirmed by the Senate, be made by the
President.
(3) Any appointment under subsection (2) of this section by the President shall be in
conformity with the provisions of section 14(3) of this Constitution:provided that in giving effect to the provisions aforesaid the President shall appoint at least
one Minister from each State, who shall be an indigene of such State.

(4) Where a member of the National Assembly or of a House of Assembly is appointed as
Minister of the Government of the Federation, he shall be deemed to have resigned his
membership of the National Assembly or of the House of Assembly on his taking the oath of
office as Minister.
(5) No person shall be appointed as a Minister of the Government of the Federation unless
he is qualified for election as a member of the House of Representatives.
(6) An appointment to any of the offices aforesaid shall be deemed to have been made
where no return has been received from the Senate within twenty-one working days of the
receipt of nomination by the Senate.
148. (1) The President may, in his discretion, assign to the Vice-President or any Minister of
the Government of the Federation responsibility for any business of the Government of the
Federation, including the administration of any department of government.
(2) The President shall hold regular meetings with the Vice-President and all the Ministers of
the Government of the Federation for the purposes of (a) determining the general direction of domestic and foreign policies of the Government of
the Federation;
(b) co-ordinating the activities of the President, the Vice-President and the Ministers of the
Government of the Federation in the discharge of their executive responsibilities; and
(c) advising the President generally in discharge of his executive functions other than those
functions with respect to which he is required by this Constitution to seek the advice or act
on the recommendation of any other person or body.
149. A Minister of the Government of the Federation shall not enter upon the duties of his
office, unless he has declared his assets and liabilities as prescribed in this Constitution and
has subsequently taken and subscribed the Oath of Allegiance and the oath of office for the
due execution of the duties of his office prescribed in the Seventh Schedule to this
Constitution.
150. (1) There shall be an Attorney-General of the Federation who shall be the Chief Law
Officer of the Federation and a Minister of the Government of the Federation.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to hold or perform the functions of the office of the
Attorney-General of the Federation unless he is qualified to practise as a legal practitioner in
Nigeria and has been so qualified for not less than ten years.
151. (1) The President may appoint any person as a Special Adviser to assist him in the
performance of his functions.
(2) The number of such Advisers and their remuneration and allowances shall be as
prescribed by law or by resolution of the National Assembly.
(3) Any appointment made pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be at the pleasure
of the President and shall cease when the President ceases to hold office.

152. A person appointed as Special Adviser under section 151 of this Constitution shall not
begin to perform the functions of his office until he has declared his assets and liabilities as
prescribed in this Constitution and has subsequently taken and subscribed the Oath of
Allegiance and oath of office prescribed in the Seventh Schedule to this Constitution.

Back to Page One

B - Establishment of certain Federal Executive Bodies
153. (1) There shall be established for the Federation the following bodies, namely:
(a) Code of Conduct Bureau;
(b) Council of State;
(c) Federal Character Commission;
(d) Federal Civil Service Commission;
(e) Federal Judicial Service Commission;
(f) Independent National Electoral Commission;
(g) National Defence Council;
(h) National Economic Council;
(i) National Judicial Council;
(j) National Population Commission;
(k) National Security Council;
(l) Nigeria Police Council;
(m) Police Service Commission; and
(n) Revenue Mobilisation Allocation and Fiscal Commission.
(2) The composition and powers of each body established by subsection (1) of this section
are as contained in Part 1 of the Third Schedule to this Constitution.
154. (1) Except in the case of ex officio members or where other provisions are made in
this Constitution, the Chairman and members of any of the bodies so established shall,
subject to the provisions of this Constitution, be appointed by the President and the
appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the Senate.
(2) In exercising his powers to appoint a person as Chairman or member of the Council of
State or the National Defence Council or the National Security Council, the President shall
not be required to obtain the confirmation of the Senate.
(3) In exercising his powers to appoint a person as Chairman or member of the
Independent National Electoral Commission, National Judicial Council, the Federal Judicial

Service Commission or the National Population Commission, the President shall consult the
Council of State.
155. (1) A person who is a member of any of the bodies established as aforesaid shall,
subject to the provisions of this Part, remain a member thereof (a) in the case of an ex officio member, whilst he holds the office by virtue of which he is a
member of the body;
(b) in the case of a person who is a member by virtue of his having previously held an
office, for the duration of his life; and
(c) in the case of a person who is a member otherwise than as ex officio member or
otherwise than by virtue of his having previously held an office, for a period of five years
from the date of his appointment.
(2) A member of any of the bodies shall cease to be member if any circumstances arise
that, if he were not a member of the body, would cause him to be disqualified for
appointment as such a member.
156. (1) No person shall be qualified for appointment as a member of any of the bodies
aforesaid if (a) he is not qualified or if he is disqualified for election as a member of the House of
Representatives;
(b) within the preceding ten years, he has been removed as a member of any of the bodies
or as the holder of any other office on the ground of misconduct.
(2) any person employed in the public service of the Federation shall not be disqualified for
appointment as Chairman or member of any of such bodies:
Provided that where such person has been duly appointed he shall, on his appointment, be
deemed to have resign his former office as from the date of the appointment.
(3) No person shall be qualified for appointment to any of the bodies aforesaid if, having
previously been appointed as a member otherwise than as an ex officio member of that
body, he has been re-appointed for a further term as a member of the same body.
157. (1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, a person holding any of
the offices to which this section applies may only be removed from that office by the
President acting on an address supported by two-thirds majority of the Senate praying that
he be so removed for inability to discharge the functions of the office (whether arising from
infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for misconduct.
(2) This section applies to the offices of the Chairman and members of the Code of Conduct
Bureau, the Federal Civil Service Commission, the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the National Judicial Council, the Federal Judicial Service Commission, the
Federal Character Commission, the Nigeria Police Council, the National Population
Commission, the Revenue Mobilisation Allocation and Fiscal Commission and the Police
Service Commission.

(3) All members of the National Population Commission shall cease to be members if the
President declares a National Census Report as unreliable and the report is rejected in
accordance with section 213 of this Constitution.
158. (1) In exercising its power to make appointments or to exercise disciplinary control
over persons, the Code of Conduct Bureau, the National Judicial Council, the Federal Civil
Service Commission, the Federal Judicial Service Commission, the Revenue Mobilisation and
Fiscal Commission, the Federal Character Commission, and the Independent National
Electoral Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other authority
or person.
(2) The National Population Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of
any other authority or person:(a) in appointing, training or arranging for the training of enumerators or other staff of the
Commission to assist it in the conduct of any population census;
(b) in deciding whether or not to accept or revise the return of any officer of the said
Commission concerning the population census in any area or part of the Federation;
(c) in carrying out the operation of conducting the census; and
(d) in compiling its report of a national census for publication.
159. (1) The quorum for a meeting of any of the bodies established by section 153 of this
Constitution shall be not less than one-third of the total number of members of that body at
the date of the meeting.
(2) A member of such a body shall be entitled to one vote, and a decision of the meeting
may be taken and any act or thing may be done in the name of that body by a majority of
the members present at the meeting.
(3) Whenever such body is assembled for a meeting, the Chairman or other person
presiding shall, in all matters in which a decision is taken by vote (by whatever name such
vote may be called) have a casting as well as a deliberative vote.
(4) Subject to its rules of procedure, any such body may act or take part in any decision
notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership or the absence of any member.
160. (1) Subject to subsection (2) of this section, any of the bodies may, with the approval
of the President, by rules or otherwise regulate its own procedure or confer powers and
impose duties on any officer or authority for the purpose of discharging its functions.
(2) In the exercise of any powers under subsection (1) of this section, any such body shall
not confer powers or impose duties on any officer or authorities of a State except with the
approval of the Governor of the State.
The President, upon the receipt of advice from the Revenue Mobilisation Allocation and
Fiscal Commission, shall table before the National Assembly proposals for revenue allocation
from the Federation Account, and in determining the formula, the National Assembly shall

take into account, the allocation principles especially those of population, equality of States,
internal revenue generation, land mass, terrain as well as population density.`
161. In this Part of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires (a) any reference to "ex officio member" shall be construed as a reference to a person who
is a member by virtue of his holding or performing, the functions of an office in the public
service of the Federation;
(b) "office" means an office in the public service of the Federation;
(c) any reference to "member" of a body established by section 153 of this Constitution
shall be construed as including a reference to the Chairman of that body; and
(d) "misconduct" means a breach of the Oath of Allegiance or oath of office of a member or
a breach of the provisions of this Constitution or bribery or corruption or false declaration of
assets and liabilities or conviction for treason or treasonable felony.

Back to Page One
C - Public Revenue
162. (1) The Federation shall maintain a special account to be called "the Federation
Account" into which shall be paid all revenues collected by the Government of the
Federation, except the proceeds from the personal income tax of the personnel of the
armed forces of the Federation, the Nigeria Police Force, the Ministry or department of
government charged with responsibility for Foreign Affairs and the residents of the Federal
Capital Territory, Abuja.
(2) The President, upon the receipt of advice from the Revenue Mobilisation Allocation and
Fiscal Commission, shall table before the National Assembly proposals for revenue allocation
from the Federation Account, and in determining the formula, the National Assembly shall
take into account, the allocation principles especially those of population, equality of States,
internal revenue generation, land mass, terrain as well as population density;
Provided that the principle of derivation shall be constantly reflected in any approved
formula as being not less than thirteen per cent of the revenue accruing to the Federation
Account directly from any natural resources.
(3) Any amount standing to the credit of the Federation Account shall be distributed among
the Federal and State Governments and the local government councils in each State on such
terms and in such manner as may be prescribed by the National Assembly.
(4) Any amount standing to the credit of the States in the Federation Account shall be
distributed among the States on such terms and in such manner as may be prescribed by
the National Assembly.
(5) The amount standing to the credit of local government councils in the Federation
Account shall also be allocated to the State for the benefit of their local government councils
on such terms and in such manner as may be prescribed by the National Assembly.

(6) Each State shall maintain a special account to be called "State Joint Local Government
Account" into which shall be paid all allocations to the local government councils of the
State from the Federation Account and from the Government of the State.
(7) Each State shall pay to local government councils in its area of jurisdiction such
proportion of its total revenue on such terms and in such manner as may be prescribed by
the National Assembly.
(8) The amount standing to the credit of local government councils of a State shall be
distributed among the local government councils of that State on such terms and in such
manner as may be prescribed by the House of Assembly of the State.
(9) Any amount standing to the credit of the judiciary in the Federation Account shall be
paid directly to the National Judicial Councils for disbursement to the heads of courts
established for the Federation and the States under section 6 of this Constitution.
(10) For the purpose of subsection (1) of this section, "revenue" means any income or
return accruing to or derived by the Government of the Federation from any source and
includes (a) any receipt, however described, arising from the operation of any law;
(b) any return, however described, arising from or in respect of any property held by the
Government of the Federation;
(c) any return by way of interest on loans and dividends in respect of shares or interest held
by the Government of the Federation in any company or statutory body.
163. Where under an Act of the National Assembly, tax or duty is imposed in respect of any
of the matters specified in item D of Part II of the Second Schedule to this Constitution, the
net proceeds of such tax or duty shall be distributed among the States on the basis of
derivation and accordingly (a) where such tax or duty is collected by the Government of a State or other authority of
the State, the net proceeds shall be treated as part of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of
that State;
(b) where such tax or duty is collected by the Government of the Federation or other
authority of the Federation, there shall be paid to each State at such times as the National
Assembly may prescribe a sum equal to the proportion of the net proceeds of such tax or
duty that are derived from that State.
164. (1) The Federation may make grants to a State to supplement the revenue of that
State in such sum and subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the
National Assembly.
(2) The Federation may make external grants to a foreign State or any international body in
furtherance of the foreign policy objectives of Nigeria in such sum and subject to such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed by the National Assembly.

165. Each State shall, in respect of each financial year, pay to the Federation an amount
equal to such part of the expenditure incurred by the Federation during that financial year
for the purpose of collection of taxes or duties which are wholly or partly payable to the
State pursuant to the provisions of this Part of this Chapter or of any Act of the National
Assembly as is proportionate to the share of the proceeds of those taxes or duties received
by the State in respect of that financial year.
166. (1) Any payment that is required by this Part of this Chapter to be made by the
Federation to a State may be set-off by the Federation in or towards payment of any sum
that is due from that State to the Federation in respect of any loan made by the Federation
to that State.
(2) The right of set-off conferred by subsection (1) of this section shall be without prejudice
to any other right of the Federation to obtain payment of any sum due to the Federation in
respect of any loan.
167. Any payment that is required by this Part of this Chapter to be made by the Federation
to a State shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Federation and any
payment that is so required to be made by a State to the Federation shall be a charge upon
the Consolidated Revenue Fund of that State.
189. (1) Where any payment falls to be made under this Part of this Chapter, the amount
payable shall be certified by the Auditor-General for the Federation;
Provided that a provisional payment may be made before the Auditor-General has given his
certificate.
(2) The National Assembly may prescribe the time at and manner in which any payment
falling to be made under this Part of this Chapter shall be effected and provide for the
making of adjustments and provisional payment.
D - The Public Service of the Federation
169. There shall be a civil service of the Federation.
170. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Federal Civil Service Commission
may, with the approval of the President and subject to such conditions as it may deem fit,
delegate any of the powers conferred upon it by this Constitution to any of its members or
to any officer in the civil service of the Federation.
171. (1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the offices to which this section applies
and to remove persons so appointed from any such office shall vest in the President.
(2) The offices to which this section applies are, namely (a) Secretary to the Government of the Federation;
(b) Head of the Civil Service of the Federation;
(c) Ambassador, High Commissioner or other Principal Representative of Nigeria abroad;

(d) Permanent Secretary in any Ministry or Head of any Extra-Ministerial Department of the
Government of the Federation howsoever designated; and
(e) any office on the personal staff of the President.
(3) An appointment to the office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation shall not
be made except from among Permanent Secretaries or equivalent rank in the civil service of
the Federation or of a State.
(4) An appointment to the office of Ambassador, High Commissioner or other Principal
Representative of Nigeria abroad shall not have effect unless the appointment is confirmed
by the Senate.
(5) In exercising his powers of appointment under this section, the President shall have
regard to the federal character of Nigeria and the need to promote national unity.
(6) Any appointment made pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (e) of subsection (2) of this
section shall be at the pleasure of the President and shall cease when the President ceases
to hold office;
Provided that where a person has been appointed from a public service of the Federation or
a State, he shall be entitled to return to the public service of the Federation or of the State
when the President ceases to hold office.
172. A person in the public service of the Federation shall observe and conform to the Code
of Conduct.
173. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the right of a person in the public
service of the Federation to receive pension or gratuity shall be regulated by law.
(2) Any benefit to which a person is entitled in accordance with or under such law as is
referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall not be withheld or altered to his
disadvantage except to such extent as is permissible under any law, including the Code of
Conduct.
(3) Pensions shall be reviewed every five years or together with any Federal civil service
salary reviews, whichever is earlier.
(4) Pensions in respect of service in the public service of the Federation shall not be taxed.
174. (1) The Attorney-General of the Federation shall have power (a) to institute and undertake criminal proceedings against any person before any court of
law in Nigeria, other than a court-martial, in respect of any offence created by or under any
Act of the National Assembly;
(b) to take over and continue any such criminal proceedings that may have been instituted
by any other authority or person; and
(c) to discontinue at any stage before judgement is delivered any such criminal proceedings
instituted or undertaken by him or any other authority or person.

(2) The powers conferred upon the Attorney-General of the Federation under subsection (1)
of this section may be exercised by him in person or through officers of his department.
(3) In exercising his powers under this section, the Attorney-General of the Federation shall
have regard to the public interest, the interest of justice and the need to prevent abuse of
legal process.
175. (1) The President may (a) grant any person concerned with or convicted of any offence created by an Act of the
National Assembly a pardon, either free or subject to lawful conditions;
(b) grant to any person a respite, either for an indefinite or for a specified period, of the
execution of any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence;
(c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment imposed on that person
for such an offence; or
(d) remit the whole or any part of any punishment imposed on that person for such an
offence or of any penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to the State on account of such an
offence.
(2) The powers of the President under subsection (1) of this section shall be exercised by
him after consultation with the Council of State.
(3) The President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Council of State, may exercise
his powers under subsection (1) of this section in relation to persons concerned with
offences against the army, naval or air-force law or convicted or sentenced by a courtmartial.

Back to Page One
Part II
State Executive
A - Governor of a State
176. (1) There shall be for each State of the Federation a Governor.
(1) Every State in Nigeria must have a Governor
(2) The Governor shall be the number-one leader of the State
177. A person can be a Governor of a State if:
(a) he is a citizen of Nigeria by birth;
(b) he is thirty-five years or above
(c) he is a member of a political party and is sponsored by that political party; and

(d) he is a School Certificate holder or its equivalent.
178. (1) The Independent National Electoral Commission shall fix a date for Governorship
election
(2) Governorship election shall be held not earlier than sixty days before the end of the
tenure of the last Governor and not later than thirty days before the end of the tenure of
the last Governor.
(3) Where there is only one candidate for a Governorship election due to disqualification,
withdrawal, incapacitation, disappearance or death of other candidates, the Independent
National Electoral Commission shall extend the time for nomination.
(4) In a Governorship election, a State shall be regarded as one constituency.
(5) Every person who is registered to vote at an election of a member of a legislative house
shall be entitled to vote at a Governorship election.
179. (1) A Governorship election is deemed to have won the election if he is the only
candidate and:
(a) he has a majority of YES votes over NO votes cast at the election; and
(b) he has not less than one-quarter of the votes cast at the election in each of at least twothirds of all the local government areas in the State,
but where the only candidate fails meet the requirements under this subsection, then there
shall be fresh nominations.
(2) Governorship election is deemed to have won the election where there being two or
more candidates if (a) he has the highest number of votes cast at the election; and
(b) he has not less than one-quarter of all the votes cast in each of at least two-thirds of all
the local government areas in the State.
(3) Where none of the candidate wins election under subsection (2) above there shall be a
fresh election in accordance with subsection (4) of this section at which the only candidates
shall be (a) the candidate with the highest number of votes at the last election; and
(b) the candidates who secured a majority of votes in the highest number of local
government areas in the State, but where there are more than one candidate with a
majority of votes in the highest number of local government areas, the candidate the next
highest total of votes cast at the election shall be the second candidate.
(4) where no one is elected under subsection (2) of this section, the Independent National
Electoral Commission shall within seven days of the result of the election arrange for an

election between the two candidates and a candidate at such election shall be deemed to
have been duly elected to the office of Governor of a State if (a) he has a majority of the votes at the election; and
(b) he has not less than one-quarter of the votes at the election in each of at least twothirds of all the local government areas in the State.
(5) where no candidate is elected under subsection (4) of this section, the Independent
National Electoral Commission shall within seven days of the result of the election, arrange
for another election between the two candidates and a candidate at such election shall be
deemed to have been elected to the office of governor of a State if he has a majority of the
votes cast at the election.
180. (1) A person shall hold the office of Governor of a State until (a) When his successor takes the oath of that same office; or
(b) he dies in office; or
(c) the date his resignation takes effect; or
(d) he ceases to hold office as provided constitution.
(2) The Governor shall vacate his office after four years beginning from the date when (a) he took the oath of Allegiance and oath of office on his first election into office; or
(b) the person actually elected took the oath of Allegiance and oath of office or the date he
would have taken the oaths if not for death..
(3) If Nigeria is at war and the President thinks it is not realistic to hold elections, the
National Assembly may by resolution extend the period of four years under subsection (2)
from time to time but such extension shall not exceed a period of six months at any one
time.
181. (1) If Governor-elect dies before taking the oath of Allegiance and oath of office, or is
unable to be sworn in, the person elected with him as Deputy governor shall be sworn in as
Governor and he shall be appoint a Deputy Governor with the approval of a simple majority
of the House of Assembly of the State.
(2) Where the Governor-elect and Deputy Governor-elect of a State die or are unable to be
sworn into office before the swearing-in of house of Assembly members, the Independent
National Electoral Commission shall immediately conduct an election for another Governor
and Deputy Governor of the State.
182. (1) No person can be the Governor of a State if (a) he has become the citizen of another country or he has made a declaration of allegiance
to another country subject to section 28 of this constitution.

(b) he has been elected as Governor twice; or
(c) under the Nigerian law, he is a lunatic or of unsound mind; or
(d) he has been sentenced to death by a court in Nigeria for dishonesty or fraud or
(e) in the past ten years before election, he has been sentenced for dishonesty or breached
the code of Conduct; or
(f) he is bankrupt, or
(g) he is a civil servant who has not resigned or retired at least thirty days before election
(h) he is a member of any cult/secret society; or
(i) he has been accused of embezzlement or fraud by a judicial or administrative panel of
inquiry.
(j) he has presented a forged certificate to the independent National Electoral Commission.
(2) Where any person has been.
(a) adjudged to be a lunatic;
(b) declared to be of unsound mind;
(c) sentenced or declared bankrupt,
(d) adjudged or declared bankrupt,
and has appealed the decision in court, he would not be disqualified under subsection (1)
until the appeal is concluded one way or the other.
183. The Governor can not hold any other executive office or paid employment while in
office as Governor of a State.
184. The National Assembly shall make laws for (a) persons who may approach an election tribunal for any question as to whether
(i) any person has been validly elected as Governor or Deputy Governor,
(ii) the tenure of a Governor or Deputy Governor has expired, or
(iii) the office of Deputy Governor has become vacant;
(b) circumstances, manner and the conditions that may warrant such application to the
tribunal; and

(c) powers, practice and procedure of the election tribunal.
185. (1) A Governor-elect shall not begin to perform the functions of a Governor until he
has declared his assets and liabilities and has taken the Oath of Allegiance and oath of office
prescribed in the Seventh Schedule to this Constitution.
(2) The Oath of Allegiance and the oath of office shall be administered by the Chief Judge of
the State or Grand Kadi of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the State, if any or President of the
Customary Court of Appeal of the State, if any, or anybody appointed to perform the
functions of any of those offices in any State.
186. Every State must have a Deputy Governor
187. (1) A candidate for Governorship election must nominate another candidate as his
running mate to occupy the office of Deputy Governor; and his running mate shall be
deemed his Deputy Governor if he wins election as Governor.
(2) The provisions above shall apply to Deputy Governor as well in relation to qualification
for election, tenure of office, disqualifications, declaration of assets and liabilities and Oath
of Governor.
188. (1) The Governor or Deputy Governor may be removed from office as provided by this
constitution.
(2) Whenever not less than one-third of the members of the House of Assembly sign notice
of any allegation in writing
(a) is sent to the Speaker of the House of Assembly
(b) stating that the Governor or his deputy is guilty of gross misconduct in the performance
of the functions of his office with full details, the speaker ensure the the Governor or his
deputy as may be concerned in given a copy of the notice within seven days and shall
ensure that any reply from the Governor or his deputy is given to all the members of the
House of Assembly.
(3) Within fourteen days of the notice to the speaker whether there is a reply or not, the
House of Assembly shall not debate but they shall pass a motion as to whether or not the
allegation shall be investigated.
(4) A motion for investigation is not passed unless it is supported by the votes of not less
than two-thirds majority of all the members of the House of Assembly.
(5) Within seven days of the passing of a motion, the Chief judge of the State shall at the
request of the speaker of the House of Assembly, appoint a Panel of seven persons who in
his opinion are of unquestionable integrity and who are not members of any public service,
legislative house or political party, to investigate the allegation against the Governor or his
deputy.
(6) The holder of an office whose conduct is being investigated shall have the right to
defend himself in person or be represented before the panel by a lawyer of his own choice.

(7) A Panel appointed under this section shall (a) shall exercise its powers functions in line with procedure provided by the House of
Assembly; and
(b) report its findings to the House of Assembly within three months of its appointment,
(8) Where the Panel reports to the House of Assembly that the allegation has not been
proved, no further proceedings shall be taken in respect of the matter.
(9) Where the Panel reports that allegation has been proved, the House of Assembly shall
consider the report within fourteen days and if the report is adopted by not less than twothirds majority of all its members, then the Governor or his deputy is deemed removed from
that date.
(10) The decisions of the Panel or the House of Assembly shall not be questioned in any
court.
(11) In this section "gross misconduct" means a grave violation or breach of the provisions of this Constitution
or a misconduct that amounts to gross misconduct in the opinion of the House of Assembly.
189. (1) The Governor or Deputy Governor of a State shall cease to hold office if
(a) he is declared to be incapable of discharging the functions of his office by a resolution
passed by two-thirds majority of all members of the executive council of the State; and
(b) the declaration in paragraph (a) is verified by medical examination report by a medical
panel established under subsection (4) of this section to the speaker of the House of
Assembly.
(2) Where the medical panel certifies that the Governor or Deputy Governor is suffering
from infirmity of body or mind that renders him permanently incapable of discharging the
functions of his office, a notice signed by the Speaker of the House of Assembly shall be
published in the Gazette of the State.
(3) The Governor or Deputy Governor ceases to be in office from the date the medical
report is published.
(4) The medical panel comprising of five medical practitioners in Nigeria shall be appointed
by the Speaker of the House of Assembly (a) one of whom shall be the personal physician of the Governor or his deputy; and
(b) four other medical practitioners who in the opinion of the Speaker of the House of
Assembly, have attained a high degree of eminence in the field of medicine relative to the
nature of the examination to be conducted.

(5) In this section, "executive council of the State" means the Commissioners of the State
or whatever they are called, charged with responsibilities for the functions of Government
as the Governor may direct.
190. Whenever the Governor sends a written notice to the Speaker of the House that he is
going on vacation or that he is otherwise unable to discharge the functions of his office, the
Deputy Governor shall continue to act as Governor until the Governor sends another notice
to the contrary.
191. (1) Where the Governor dies, resigns, is impeached, is removed or permanently
incapacitated, the Deputy Governor shall become the Governor in accordance with section
188 or 189 of this Constitution.
(2) Where any vacancy occurs in the circumstances mentioned in subsection (1) and there
is no Deputy Governor, the Speaker of the House of Assembly shall become the Governor
for three months, and election must be held for a new Governor who shall continue with the
remaining term of the former original Governor.
(3) Where the office of the Deputy Governor becomes vacant (a) by reason of death, resignation, impeachment, permanent incapacity or removal in
accordance with section 188 or 189 of this Constitution;
(b) by his assumption of the office of Governor of a State in accordance with subsection (1)
of this section; or
(c) for any other reason, the Governor shall nominate and appoint a new Deputy Governor
with the approval of the House of Assembly of the State.
192. (1) A Governor shall appoint Commissioners of the Government of a State.
(2) Appointment of Commissioners must be confirmed by the House of Assembly in
conformity with federal character.

(3) Where a member of a House of Assembly or of the National Assembly is appointed as
Commissioner of the Government of a State, he shall be deemed to have resigned his
membership of the House of Assembly or of the National Assembly on his taking the Oath of
office as Commissioner.
(4) No person shall be appointed as a Commissioner of the Government of a State unless he
is qualified for election as a member of the House of Assembly of the State.
(5) A person is deemed to have been appointed a Commissioner if no response has been
received from the House of Assembly within twenty-one working days of the receipt of
nomination, by the House of Assembly.
193. (1) The Governor may assign to the Deputy Governor or any Commissioner
responsibility for any business of the Government, including the administration of any
department of Government.

(2) The Governor of a State shall hold regular meetings with the Deputy Governor and all
Commissioners for the purposes of (a) determining the general direction of the policies of the Government of the State;
(b) co-ordinating the activities of the Governor, the Deputy Governor and the
Commissioners in performing their responsibilities; and
(c) advising the Governor on his functions, apart from those functions for which this
Constitution requires him to seek advice or recommendation of anyone else.
194. A Commissioner shall not resume office unless he has declared his assets and
liabilities and has taken the oath of Allegiance and the oath for performance of his duties.
195. (1) Each State shall have an Attorney-General who shall be the Chief Law Officer of
the State and Commissioner for Justice of that State.
(2) An Attorney General must be a lawyer and he must have not less than ten years
experience.
196. (1) The Governor may appoint any body as a Special Adviser to assist him in the
performance of his functions.
(2) The number of his Advisers, their salaries and allowances must be provided by law or by
a decision of the House of Assembly of the State.
(3) The appointment of a Special Adviser is at the pleasure of the Governor and it shall be
terminated when the Governor leaves office.
(4) A Special Adviser must declare his assets and liabilities before he starts performing his
functions in office.

B - Establishment of Certain State Executive Bodies
197. (1) Every State must have the following bodies, namely (a) State Civil Service Commission;
(b) State Independent Electoral Commission; and
(c) State Judicial Service Commission.
(2) The membership and powers of each body listed above are contained in Part II of the
Third Schedule to this Constitution.
(3) The Governor must consider federal character in appointing chairmen and members of
the boards of government companies, Universities and tertiary institutions.

198. The Governor shall have powers to appoint the Chairmen and members of government
agencies apart from ex-officio members and other provisions of this Constitution on
appointment and such appointment by the Governor must be confirmed by the House of
Assembly.
199. (1) A member of the above listed bodies shall remain a member (a) if he is an ex-officio member and doubles as a member;
(b) a life member; and
(c) Someone who has been a member for a period of five years
(2) A member would stop been a member if any circumstance that would disqualify him
from being appointed (under section 200) arises.
200. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of any of the bodies
listed above if (a) he is not qualified or if he is disqualified for election as a member of a House of
Assembly;
(b) he has in the past ten years, been removed as a member of any of the bodies or as the
holder of any other office on the ground of misconduct.
(2) Any public servant appointed as chairman or member of the above listed bodies would
be qualified if he has resigned from public service before his appointment.
(3) A person shall be qualified for appointment to any of the bodies if he has been reappointed for another term unless he is an ex-officio member of the same body.
201. (1) An Appointee into any of the bodies above can only be removed by the Governor
acting on the report of the House of Assembly that the said Appointee is unable to discharge
the functions of his office either from disease of the mind or body or for misconduct.
(2) This section applies to the Offices of the Chairman and members of the State Civil
Service Commission, the State Independent Electoral Commission and the State Judicial
Service Commission.
202 The State Civil Service Commission, the State Independent Electoral Commission and
the State Judicial Service Commission can make appointments of discipline their officials
without the direction and control of anyone.
203. (1) The quorum for a meeting of any of the bodies established by section 197 shall not
be less than one-third of their members on the meeting date.
(2) Each member has only one vote and a decision and the decision of the majority shall be
treated as that of the body.
(3) At such meetings, the Chairman or anyone presiding shall have a vote as well.

(4) Subject to its rules of procedure, any such body may act or take any decision
notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership or the absence of any member.
204. (1) The Governor may approve rules and regulations made by the bodies to confer
powers or impose duties on any officer to function.
(2) The President may approve powers or duties imposed on any federal government
officer or agency by a state officer or agency.
205. In this Part, unless expressly stated:(a) any reference to ex officio member means a member of the public service of a State;
(b) office means an office in the public service of a State;
(c) member of any of the bodies established by section 197 of this Constitution includes the
Chairman of that body; and
(d) misconduct means breach of the Oath of Allegiance, oath of office of a member or this
Constitution or bribery or corruption or false declaration of assets and liabilities or conviction
for treason or treasonable felony.
C - The Public Service of a State
206. Every State must have a Civil Service.
207. The State Civil Service Commission may delegate its powers to any civil servant with
the approval of the Governor.
208. (1) The Governor has powers to fire and hire anyone appointed to hold office in the
civil service.
(2) The offices to which this section applies are, namely (a) Secretary to the Government of the State;
(b) Head of the Civil Service of the State;
(c) Permanent Secretary or other chief executive in any Ministry or Department of the
Government of the State howsoever designated; and
(d) any office of the personal staff of the Governor.
(3) The Head of the Civil Service of a State must be appointed from among Permanent
Secretaries or equivalent rank in the civil service of any State or of the Federation.
(4) The Governor must have regard for the diversity of the people within the state and the
need to promote national unity while appointing anyone under this section.

(5) Any appointment made under paragraphs (a) and (d) of subsection (2) of this section
shall be at the pleasure of the Governor and shall cease when the Governor ceases to hold
office:
Provided that a public servant appointed under this section shall be entitled to return to
public service when the Governor leaves office.
209. A public servant shall observe and conform to the Code of Conduct.
210. (1) The right of a public servant to receive pension or gratuity shall be regulated by
law.
(2) Any benefit to be enjoyed by a public servant as given by such law must not be withheld
or amended to his advantage except as provided by law including the Code of Conduct
(3) Pensions shall be reviewed every five years or whenever civil servants salary is
reviewed or whichever comes earlier.
(4) Pensions of civil servants shall not be taxed.
211. (1) The Attorney General of a state shall have power
(a) sue anybody in any court apart from court-martial for any offence created under any law
of the House of Assembly;
(b) to take over and continue any criminal case filed by any other authority or person; and
(c) to stop any criminal case filed by anybody before judgement
(2) The Attorney General may delegate his powers to any of his officers.
(3) The attorney-General must have regard to the public interest, the interest of justice
and the need to prevent abuse of legal process when exercising his powers.
212. (1) The Governor may (a) Pardon any person found guilty by court of any offence created by any law of a state
(State Offence), either free or subject to lawful conditions;
(b) grant relief from punishment imposed on anyone for a State offence
(c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any person for such an offence; or
(d) Cancel all or part of punishment imposed on the person.
(2) The Governor shall exercise these powers after consulting with the advisory council on
prerogative of mercy.

Part III

Supplemental
A - National Population Census
213. (1) The Chairman of the National Population Commission must deliver any census
report to the President after every census.
(2) Within thirty days after receiving the report, the President must present it to the
Council of State which shall consider the report and advise the President whether to accept
it or reject it.
(3) Where the Council of State advises the President to accept the report, the President
shall accept the same and shall then lay the report on the table of each House of the
National Assembly.
(4) Where the President accept such report and has laid it on the table of each House of the
National Assembly, he shall publish it in the official Gazette of the Government of the
Federation for public information.
(5) Where the Council of State advises the president to reject upon the ground(a) that the population census contained in the report is inaccurate; or
(b) that the report is perverse,
the President shall reject the report accordingly and no reliance shall be placed upon any
such report by any authority or person or for any purpose what so ever.
B - Nigeria Police Force
214. (1) There shall be a police force for Nigeria and it shall be known as the Nigeria Police
Force, and no other police force shall be established for Nigeria or any part thereof.
(2) Except as provided by this Constitution (a) the Nigeria Police Force shall be regulated by a law passed by the National Assembly
(b) the powerd and duties of the Police shall be as provided by law
(c) the National Assembly may make law creating branches of the Nigeria Police Force for
the protection of harbours, waterways, railways and air fields.
215. (1) There shall be (a) an Inspector-General of Police who, shall be appointed by the President on the advice of
the Nigeria Police Council from among serving members of the Nigeria Police Force;
(b) a Commissioner of Police for each state of the Federation who shall be appointed by the
Police Service Commission.

(2) The Nigeria Police Force shall be under the command of the Inspector-General of Police
while the Commissioner of Police shall head the police contingent of a state under the
supervision of the Inspector General of Police.
(3) The President or any authorized Minister may give lawful directions to the InspectorGeneral of Police on the maintenance of public safety and order and the Inspector-General
of Police shall comply with those direction or cause them to be compiled with.
(4) The Governor or any authorized Commissioner may give lawful directions to the
Commissioner of Police on the maintenance and securing of public safety and public order
within the state and the Commissioner of Police shall comply with those directions or cause
them to be complied with:
But before obeying the directions, the Commissioner of Police may refer the matter be
referred to the President or the authorized Minister.
(5) The court shall not have powers to look into the directions given under this section.
216. (1) The Nigeria Police Council may, delegate any of its powers to the Inspector
General of Police or any Police Officer with the approval of the President.
(2) The President shall consult the Nigeria Police Council before appointing or removing the
Inspector-General of Police.
C - Armed Forces of the Federation.
217. (1) There shall be an armed forces for the Federation which shall consist of an army, a
navy, an Air Force and such other branches of the armed forces as may be established by a
law passed by the National Assembly.
(2) The Federal Government shall equip and maintain the armed forces as provided by law
passed by the National Assembly made in that behalf, for the purpose of (a) defending Nigeria from external aggression;
(b) maintaining its territorial integrity and securing its borders from violation on land, sea,
or air;
(c) suppressing civil disturbances and to restore order when called by the President as in
accordance with law passed by the National Assembly
(d) performance such other functions as may be provided by a law of the National
Assembly.
(3) Membership of the top officers of the armed forces must reflect the federal character of
Nigeria.
218. (1) The President is the Commander-in Chief of Armed forces and he has powers to
use the armed forces for operations.

(2) The President has powers to appoint the Chief of Defence staff, the Chief of Army Staff,
the Chief of Naval Staff, the Chief of Air Staff and heads of any other branches of the armed
forces of Nigeria as may be established by a law of the National Assembly.
(3) The President may delegate his powers of operational use of the Armed Forces to any
member of the armed forces.
(4) The National Assembly shall have power to make laws regulating (a) the powers of the President as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the
Federation; and
(b) the appointment, promotion and disciplinary control of members of the armed forces of
the Federation.
219. The National Assembly shall (a) in giving effect to the functions of the armed forces; and
(b) pass a law to establish a body that would ensure that the membership of the armed
forces reflect federal character.
220. (1) The Federal Government shall establish and maintain adequate facilities for the
enforcement of any law of the National Assembly providing for compulsory military training
or military service for citizens of Nigeria.
(2) Until a law is passed the President may maintain adequate facilities in any secondary or
post-secondary educational institution in Nigeria for giving military training to any instutiton
that desires such training.
D - Political Parties
221. Only a political party shall be entitled to canvass for votes at any election or raise
funds for any political party or for the election of any candidate at an election.
222. No association shall function as a political party, unless (a) the names and addresses of its national officers are registered with the Independent
National Electoral Commission;
(b) the membership is open to every citizen of Nigeria irrespective of his place of origin,
circumstance of birth, sex, religion or ethnic grouping;
(c) a copy of its constitution is registered in the principal office of the Independent National
Electoral Commission in such form as may be prescribed by the Independent National
Electoral Commission;
(d) any amendment in its registered constitution is also registered in the principal office of
the Independent National Electoral Commission within thirty days of the amendment

(e) the name of the association, its symbol or logo does not contain any ethnic or religious
connotation or give the appearance that the activities of the association are only based on a
particular geographical area of Nigeria; and
(f) the headquarters of the association is situated in the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
223. (1) The Constitution and rules of a political party shall(a) provide for the periodical election of the leadership of the party on democratic basis;
and
(b) ensure that the leadership of the political party reflect the federal character of Nigeria.
(2) For the purposes of this section (a) the election of the leadership of the political party must be conducted latest every four
years
(b) the members of political party must belong to different states not less than twenty four
of all the states in Nigeria and the Federal Capital Territory.
224. The programme as well as the aims and objects of a political party shall conform with
the provisions of Chapter II of this Constution.
225. (1) Every political party must publish its assets and liabilities as directed by the
Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) and publish a statement of its assets
and liabilities.
(2) Every political party shall submit to INEC a detailed annual statement and analysis of its
sources of funds and other assets together with a statement of its expenditure as INEC may
require.
(3) No political party shall (a) have funds or other assets outside Nigeria; or
(b) be receive funds or assets sent to it from outside Nigeria.
(4) Any funds or other assets sent to a political party from outside Nigeria shall be paid over
or transferred to the INEC within twenty-one days of its receipt with any information as the
INEC may require.
(5) The Commission shall have power to give directions to political parties regarding the
books or records of financial transactions which they shall keep and, to examine all such
books and records.
(6) INEC may delegate its powers under this section to any member of its staff or any
person who is an auditor by profession, and who is not a member of a political party.

226. (1) Every year, INEC shall prepare and submit a financial report on all political parties
to the National Assembly.
(2) INEC shall conduct proper investigation on whether proper books of accounts and
records have been kept by any political party, and if it is of the opinion that proper books of
accounts have not been kept by a political party, it shall so report.
(3) Every member of INEC or its duly authorised agent shall (a) have a right of access at all times to the books and accounts and vouchers of all political
parties; and
(b) be entitled to request from a political party necessary information for investigation and
shall state in its report.
227. No association shall organize or train persons on the use of physical force or coercion
in promoting any political objective or interest.
228. The National Assembly may pass law (a) any leader or manager of a political party found to have breached sections 221, 225(3)
and 227 of this Constitution;
(b) to disqualify any persons from holding public office on the ground that he knowingly aids
or abets a political party in contravening section 225(3) of this Constitution;
(c) to provide annual funding to political parties through INEC on a fair and equitable basis
to assist the parties in the discharge of their functions; and
(d) to give powers to INEC to effectively to ensure that political parties observe the
provisions of this part of this chapter.
229. In this Part of this chapter, unless the expressly stated otherwise "association" means any registered or unregistered body of persons who agree to act
together for any common purpose, and includes an association formed for any ethnic,
social, cultural, occupational religious purpose; and
"political party" means any association whose activities include canvassing for votes in
support of a candidate for election to the office of President, Vice-President, Governor,
Deputy Governor or membership of a legislative house or of a local government council.