Chapter VIII
Federal Capital Territory, Abuja and General Supplementary Provisions
==================================================

Chapter VIII
Federal Capital Territory, Abuja and General Supplementary Provisions
Part I
Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
297. (1) There shall be a Federal Capital Territory, Abuja the boundaries of which are as
defined in Part II of the First Schedule to this Constitution.
(2) The ownership of all lands comprised in the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja shall vest in
the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
298. The Federal Capital Territory, Abuja shall be the Capital of the Federation and seat of
the Government of the Federation.
299. The provisions of this Constitution shall apply to the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja as
if it were one of the States of the Federation; and accordingly (a) all the legislative powers, the executive powers and the judicial powers vested in the
House of Assembly, the Governor of a State and in the courts of a State shall, respectively,
vest in the National Assembly, the President of the Federation and in the courts which by
virtue of the foregoing provisions are courts established for the Federal Capital Territory,
Abuja;
(b) all the powers referred to in paragraph (a) of this section shall be exercised in
accordance with the provisions of this Constitution; and
(c) the provisions of this Constitution pertaining to the matters aforesaid shall be read with
such modifications and adaptations as may be reasonably necessary to bring them into
conformity with the provisions of this section.
300. For the purposes of Chapter V of this Constitution, the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
shall constitute one Senatorial district and as many Federal constituencies as it is entitled to
under section 49 of this Constitution.
301. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 299 of this
Constitution, in its application to the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, this Constitution shall
be construed as if(a) references to the Governor, Deputy Governor and the executive council of a State
(howsoever called) were references to the President, Vice-President and the executive
council of the Federation (howsoever called) respectively;
(b) references to the Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court of a State were references to
the Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court, which is established for the Federal Capital
Territory, Abuja by the provisions of this Constitution; and
(c) references to persons, offices and authorities of a State were references to the persons,
offices and authorities of the Federation with like status, designations and powers,
respectively; and in particular, as if references to the Attorney-General, Commissioners and

the Auditor-General for a State were references to the Attorney-General, Ministers and the
Auditor-General of the Federation with like status, designations and powers.
302. The President may, in exercise of the powers conferred upon him by section 147 of
this Constitution, appoint for the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja a Minister who shall
exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be delegated to him by the
President, from time to time.
303. The Federal Capital Territory, Abuja shall comprise six area councils and the
administrative and political structure thereof shall be as provided by an Act of the National
Assembly.
304. (1) There shall be for the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, a Judicial Service
Committee of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, the composition and functions of which
shall be as provided in Part III of the Third Schedule to this Constitution.
(2) The provisions of sections 154(1) and (3), 155, 156, 157(1) and (2), 158(1) and 159 to
161 of this Constitution shall apply with necessary modifications to the Judicial Service
Committee of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.

Back to Page One
Part II
Miscellaneous Provisions
305. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the President may by instrument
published in the Official -Gazette} of the Government of the Federation issue a Proclamation
of a state of emergency in the Federation or any part thereof.
(2) The President shall immediately after the publication, transmit copies of the Official Gazette of the Government of the Federation containing the proclamation including the
details of the emergency to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, each of whom shall forthwith convene or arrange for a meeting of the
House of which he is President or Speaker, as the case may be, to consider the situation
and decide whether or not to pass a resolution approving the Proclamation.
(3) The President shall have power to issue a Proclamation of a state of emergency only
when (a) the Federation is at war;
(b) the Federation is in imminent danger of invasion or involvement in a state of war;
(c) there is actual breakdown of public order and public safety in the Federation or any part
thereof to such extent as to require extraordinary measures to restore peace and security;
(d) there is a clear and present danger of an actual breakdown of public order and public
safety in the Federation or any part thereof requiring extraordinary measures to avert such
danger;
(e) there is an occurrence or imminent danger, or the occurrence of any disaster or natural
calamity, affecting the community or a section of the community in the Federation;

(f) there is any other public danger which clearly constitutes a threat to the existence of the
Federation; or
(g) the President receives a request to do so in accordance with the provisions of subsection
(4) of this section.
(4) The Governor of a State may, with the sanction of a resolution supported by two-thirds
majority of the House of Assembly, request the President to issue a Proclamation of a state
of emergency in the State when there is in existence within the State any of the situations
specified in subsection (3) (c), (d) and (e) of this section and such situation does not extend
beyond the boundaries of the State.
(5) The President shall not issue a Proclamation of a state of emergency in any case to
which the provisions of subsection (4) of this section apply unless the Governor of the State
fails within a reasonable time to make a request to the President to issue such
Proclamation.
(6) A Proclamation issued by the President under this section shall cease to have effect (a) if it is revoked by the President by instrument published in the Official Gazette of the
Government of the Federation;
(b) if it affects the Federation or any part thereof and within two days when the National
Assembly is in session, or within ten days when the National Assembly is not in session,
after its publication, there is no resolution supported by two-thirds majority of all the
members of each House of the National Assembly approving the Proclamation;
(c) after a period of six months has elapsed since it has been in force:
Provided that the National Assembly may, before the expiration of the period of six months
aforesaid, extend the period for the Proclamation of the state of emergency to remain in
force from time to time for a further period of six months by resolution passed in like
manner; or
(d) at any time after the approval referred to in paragraph (b) or the extension referred to
in paragraph (c) of this subsection, when each House of the National Assembly revokes the
Proclamation by a simple majority of all the members of each House.
306. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, any person who is appointed, elected
or otherwise selected to any office established by this Constitution may resign from that
office by writing under his hand addressed to the authority or person by whom he was
appointed, elected or selected.
(2) The resignation of any person from any office established by this Constitution shall take
effect when the writing signifying the resignation is received by the authority or person to
whom it is addressed or by any person authorised by that authority or person to receive it.
(3) The notice of resignation of the President and of the Vice-President shall respectively be
addressed to the president of the Senate and to the President.

(4) On the resignation of the President, the President of the Senate shall forthwith give
notice of the resignation to the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
(5) The notice of resignation of the Governor and of the Deputy Governor of a State shall
respectively be addressed to the Speaker of the House of Assembly and the Governor of the
State.
(6) The notice of resignation of the President of the Senate and of the Speaker of the House
of Representatives shall in each case be addressed to the Clerk of the National Assembly,
and the notice of resignation of the Speaker of a House of Assembly shall be addressed to
the Clerk of the House of Assembly of the State.
(7) The notice of resignation of a member of a legislative house shall be addressed to the
President of the Senate or, as the case may require, to the Speaker of the legislative house
in question.
307. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in Chapter IV and subject to sections 131
and 177 of this Constitution, no citizen of Nigeria by registration or under a grant of
certificate of naturalisation shall within ten years of such registration or grant, hold any
elective or appointive office under this Constitution.
308. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Constitution, but subject to
subsection (2) of this section (a) no civil or criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued against a person to
whom this section applies during his period of office;
(b) a person to whom this section applies shall not be arrested or imprisoned during that
period either in pursuance of the process of any court or otherwise; and
(c) no process of any court requiring or compelling the appearance of a person to whom this
section applies, shall be applied for or issued:
Provided that in ascertaining whether any period of limitation has expired for the purposes
of any proceedings against a person to whom this section applies, no account shall be taken
of his period of office.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to civil proceedings
against a person to whom this section applies in his official capacity or to civil or criminal
proceedings in which such a person is only a nominal party.
(3) This section applies to a person holding the office of President or Vice-President,
Governor or Deputy Governor; and the reference in this section to "period of office" is a
reference to the period during which the person holding such office is required to perform
the functions of the office.

Back to Page One
Part III
Transitional Provisions and Savings
309. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter III of this Constitution but subject to
section 28 thereof, any person who became a citizen of Nigeria by birth, registration or

naturalisation under the provisions of any other Constitution shall continue to be a citizen of
Nigeria under this Constitution.
310. (1) Until the National Assembly or a House of Assembly has exercised its powers to
initiate legislation in accordance with the provisions of section 51 or 93 of this Constitution,
the Clerk or other staff of a legislative house shall be appointed, as respects each House of
the National Assembly by the Federal Civil Service Commission, and as respects a House of
Assembly by the State Civil Service Commission.
(2) In exercising its powers under the provisions of this section, the Federal Civil Service
Commission shall consult, as appropriate, the President of the Senate or the Speaker of the
House of the Representatives, and a State Civil Service Commission shall consult the
Speaker of the House of Assembly of the State.
311. (1) The provisions of this section shall have effect until the National Assembly or a
House of Assembly exercises the powers conferred upon it by section 60 or 101 of this
Constitution as appropriate.
(2) The Standing Orders of the Senate established under the former Constitution shall apply
in relation to the proceedings in the Senate established under this Constitution.
(3) The Standing Orders of the House of Representatives established under the former
Constitution shall apply in relation to the proceedings in the House of Representatives
established under this Constitution.
(4) The Standing Orders of a House of Assembly established under the former Constitution
shall apply in relation to a House of Assembly of a State established under this Constitution.
(5) The Standing Orders of the former legislative houses referred to in subsections (2), (3)
and (4) of this section, shall apply in relation to a legislative house with such modifications
as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with the provisions of this Constitution.
(6) In this section, the "former Constitution" refers to the Constitution of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria 1979.
312. (1) The electoral commission established for the Federation under any law in force
immediately before the date when this section comes into force shall be responsible for
performing the functions conferred on the Independent National Electoral Commission
established by the provisions of this Constitution.
(2) Any person who before the coming into force of this Constitution was elected to any
elective office mentioned in this Constitution in accordance with the provisions of any law in
force immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be deemed to have
been duly elected to that office under this Constitution.
313. Pending any Act of the National Assembly for the provision of a system of revenue
allocation between the Federation and the States, among the States, between the States
and local government councils and among the local government councils in the States, the
system of revenue allocation in existence for the financial year beginning from 1st January
1998 and ending on 31st December 1998 shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution
and as from the date when this section comes into force, continue to apply:

Provided that where functions have been transferred under this Constitution from the
Government of the Federation to the States and from the States to local government
councils the appropriations in respect of such functions shall also be transferred to the
States and the local government councils, as the case may require.
314. Any debt of the Federation or of a State which immediately before the date when this
section comes into force was charged on the revenue and assets of the Federation or on the
revenue and assets of a State shall, as from the date when this section comes into force,
continue to be so charged.
315. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, an existing law shall have effect with
such modifications as may be necessary to bring it into conformity with the provisions of
this Constitution and shall be deemed to be (a) an Act of the National Assembly to the extent that it is a law with respect to any matter
on which the National Assembly is empowered by this Constitution to make laws; and
(b) a Law made by a House of Assembly to the extent that it is a law with respect to any
matter on which a House of Assembly is empowered by this Constitution to make laws.
(2) The appropriate authority may at any time by order make such modifications in the text
of any existing law as the appropriate authority considers necessary or expedient to bring
that law into conformity with the provisions of this Constitution.
(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as affecting the power of a court of law or
any tribunal established by law to declare invalid any provision of an existing law on the
ground of inconsistency with the provision of any other law, that is to say(a) any other existing law;
(b) a Law of a House of Assembly;
(c) an Act of the National Assembly; or
(d) any provision of this Constitution.
(4) In this section, the following expressions have the meanings assigned to them,
respectively (a) "appropriate authority" means (i) the President, in relation to the provisions of any law of the Federation,
(ii) the Governor of a State, in relation to the provisions of any existing law deemed to be a
Law made by the House of Assembly of that State, or
(iii) any person appointed by any law to revise or rewrite the laws of the Federation or of a
State;

(b) "existing law" means any law and includes any rule of law or any enactment or
instrument whatsoever which is in force immediately before the date when this section
comes into force or which having been passed or made before that date comes into force
after that date; and
(c) "modification" includes addition, alteration, omission or repeal.
(5) Nothing in this Constitution shall invalidate the following enactments, that is to say (a) the National Youth Service Corps Decree 1993;
(b) the Public Complaints Commission Act;
(c) the National Security Agencies Act;
(d) the Land Use Act,
and the provisions of those enactments shall continue to apply and have full effect in
accordance with their tenor and to the like extent as any other provisions forming part of
this Constitution and shall not be altered or repealed except in accordance with the
provisions of section 9 (2) of this Constitution.
(6) Without prejudice to subsection (5) of this section, the enactments mentioned in the
said subsection shall hereafter continue to have effect as Federal enactments and as if they
related to matters included in the Exclusive Legislative List set out in Part I of the Second
Schedule to this Constitution.
316. (1) Any office, court of law or authority which immediately before the date when this
section comes into force was established and charged with any function by virtue of any
other Constitution or law shall be deemed to have been duly established and shall continue
to be charged with such function until other provisions are made, as if the office, court of
law or authority was established and charged with the function by virtue of this Constitution
or in accordance with the provisions of a law made thereunder.
(2) Any person who immediately before the date when this section comes into force holds
office by virtue of any other Constitution or law in force immediately before the date when
this section comes into force shall be deemed to be duly appointed to that office by virtue of
this Constitution or by any authority by whom appointments to that office fall to be made in
pursuance of this Constitution.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, any person holding such
office, a member of a court of law or authority, who would have been required to vacate
such office, or where his membership of such court of law or authority would have ceased
but for the provisions of the said subsection (2) of this section, shall at the expiration of the
period prescribed therefor after the date when this section comes into force vacate such
office or, as the case may be, his membership of such court of law or authority shall cease,
accordingly.
(4) The foregoing provisions of this section are without prejudice to the exercise of such
powers as may be conferred by virtue of this Constitution or a law upon any authority or
person to make provisions with respect to such matters as may be prescribed or authorised

by this Constitution or such law, including the establishment and abolition of offices, courts
of law or authorities, and with respect to the appointment of persons to hold offices or to be
members of courts of law or authorities and their removal from such offices, courts of law or
authorities.
317. (1) Without prejudice to the generality of section 315 of this constitution, any
property, right, privilege, liability or obligation which immediately before the date when this
section comes into force was vested in, exercisable or enforceable by or against(a) the former authority of the Federation as representative or trustee for the benefit of the
Federation;
(b) any former authority of a state as representative or trustee for the benefit of the state,
shall on the date when this section comes into force and without further assurance than the
provisions thereof vest in, or become exercisable of enforceable by or against the President
and Government of the Federation, and the Governor and Government of the state, as the
case may be
(2) For the purposes of this section (a) the President and Government of the Federation, and the Governor and Government of
a state, shall be deemed, respectively, to be successors to the said former authority of the
Federation and former authority of the state in question; and
(b) references in this section to "former authority of the Federation" and "former authority
of a state" include references to the former Government of the Federation and the former
government of a state, a local government authority or any person who exercised any
authority on its behalf.

Back to Page One
Part IV
Interpretation, Citation and commencement
318. (1) In this constitution, unless it is otherwise expressly provided or the context
otherwise requires"Act" or "Act of the National Assembly" means any law made by the National Assembly and
includes any law which takes effect under the provisions of this constitution as an Act of the
National Assembly;
"appointment" or its cognate expression includes appointment on promotion and transfer or
confirmation of appointment;
"area council" means each of the administrative areas within the Federal Capital Territory,
Abuja;
"authority" includes government;
"belong to" or its grammatical expression when used with reference to a person in a state
refers to a person either or whose parents or any of whose grand parents was a member of
a community indigenous to that state;

"civil service of the Federation" means service of the Federation in a civil capacity as staff of
the office of the President, the Vice-President, a ministry or department of the government
of the Federation assigned with the responsibility for any business of the Government of the
Federation;
"civil service of the state" means service of the government of a state in a civil capacity as
staff of the office of the governor, deputy governor or a ministry or department of the
government of the state assigned with the responsibility for any business of the government
of the state;
"Cod of Conduct" refers to the Code of Conduct contained in the fifth schedule to this
constitution;
"Commissioner" means a Commissioner of the Government of a State;
"Concurrent Legislative List" means the list of matters set out in the first column in Part 11
of the second schedule to this constitution with respect to which the National Assembly and
a House of Assembly may make laws to the extent prescribed, respectively, opposite
thereto in the second column thereof;
"decision" means, in relation to a court, any determination of that court and includes
judgement decree, order, conviction, sentence or recommendation;
"enactment" means provision of any law or a subsidiary instrument;
"Exclusive Legislative List" means the list in Part 1 of the second schedule to this
constitution;
"existing law" has the meaning assigned to it in section 315 of this constitution;
"federal character of Nigeria" refers to the distinctive desire of the peoples of Nigeria to
promote national unity, foster national loyalty and give every citizen of Nigeria a sense of
belonging to the nation as expressed in section 14 (3) and (4) of this constitution;
"Federation" means the Federal Republic of Nigeria;
"financial year" means any period of twelve months beginning on the first day of January in
any year or such other date as the National Assembly may prescribe;
"function" includes power and duty;
"government" includes the Government of the Federation, or of any state, or of a local
government council or any person who exercises power of authority on its behalf;
"Governor" or "Deputy Governor" means the governor of a state or a deputy governor of a
state;
"House of Assembly" means the House of Assembly of a state;

"Financial year" means any period of twelve months beginning on the first day of January in
any year or such other date as the National Assembly may prescribe;
"function" includes power and duty;
"government" includes the Government of the Federation, or any State, or of a local
government council or any person who exercises power or authority on its behalf;
"Governor" or Deputy Governor" means the Governor of a State or a Deputy Governor of a
State;
"House of Assembly" means the House of Assembly of a State;
"Judicial office" means the office of Chief Justice of Nigeria or a Justice of the Supreme
Court, the President or Justice of the Court of Appeal, the office of the Chief Judge or a
Judge of the Federal High Court, the office of the Chief Judge or Judge of the High Court of
the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, the office of the Chief Judge of a State and Judge of the
High Court of a State, a Grand Kadi or Kadi of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the Federal
Capital Territory, Abuja, a President or Judge of the Customary Court of Appeal; of the
Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, a Grand Kadi or Kadi of the Sharia Court of Appeal of a
State; and a reference to a "judicial officer" is a reference to the holder of any such office;
"law" means a law enacted by the House of Assembly of a State;
"Legislative house" means the Senate, House of Representatives or a House of Assembly.
"Local government area" or "local government council" includes an area council;
"public service of a State’ means the service of the State in any capacity in respect of the
Government of the State and includes service as:
(a) Clerk or other staff of the House of Assembly;
(b) member of staff of the High Court, the Sharia court of Appeal, the Customary Court of
Appeal; or other courts established for a State by this Constitution or by a Law of a House
of Assembly;
(c) member or staff of any commission or authority established for the State by this
Constitution or by a Law of a House of Assembly;
(d) staff of any local government council;
(e) staff of any statutory corporation established by a Law of a House of Assembly;
(f) staff of any educational institution established or financed principally by a government of
a State; and
(g) staff of any company or enterprise in which the government of a State or its agency
holds controlling shares or interest;

"School Certificate or its equivalent" means
(a) a Secondary School Certificate or its equivalent, or Grade II Teacher’s Certificate, the
City and Guilds Certificate; or
(b) education up to Secondary School Certificate level; or
(c) Primary Six School Leaving Certificate or its equivalent and (i) service in the public or private sector in the Federation in any capacity acceptable to the
Independent National Electoral Commission for a minimum of ten years, and
(ii) attendance at courses and training in such institutions as may be acceptable to the
Independent National Electoral Commission for periods totalling up to a minimum of one
year, and
(iii) the ability to read, write, understand and communicate in the English language to the
satisfaction of the Independent National Electoral Commission, and
(d) any other qualification acceptable by the Independent National Electoral Commission;
"Secret society" includes any society, association, group or body of persons (whether
registered or not)
(a) that uses secret signs, oaths, rites or symbols and which is formed to promote a cause,
the purpose or part of the purpose of which is to foster the interest of its members and to
aid one another under any circumstances without due regard to merit, fair play or justice to
the detriment of the legitimate interest of those who are not members;
(b) the membership of which is incompatible with the function or dignity of any public office
under this Constitution and whose members are sworn to observe oaths of secrecy; or
(c) the activities of which are not known to the public at large, the names of whose
members are kept secret and whose meetings and other activities are held in secret;
"State" when used otherwise than in relation to one of the component parts of the
Federation, includes government.
(2) Wherever it is provided that any authority or person has power to make, recommend or
approve an appointment to an office, such power shall be construed as including the power
to make, recommend or approve a person for such appointment, whether on promotion or
otherwise, or to act in any such office.
(3) In this Constitution, references to a person holding an office shall include reference to a
person acting in such office.
(4) The Interpretation Act shall apply for the purpose of interpreting the provision of this
Constitution.

319. This Constitution may be cited as the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
1999.
320. The provision of this Constitution shall come into force on 29th day of May 1999.

Back to Page One
Schedules
First Schedule
Part 1
States of the Federation
State

Local Government Areas

Capital City

Abia

Aba North, Aba South, Arochukwu, Bende, Ikwuano, Isiala-Ngwa
North, Isiala-Ngwa South, Isuikwato, Obi Nwa, Ohafia, Osisioma
Ngwa, Ugwunagbo, Ukwa East, Ukwa West, Umuahia North,
Umuahia South, Umu-Neochi

Umuahia

Adamawa

Demsa, Fufore, Ganaye, Gireri, Gombi, Guyuk, Hong, Jada,
Lamurde, Madagali, Maiha, Mayo-Belwa, Michika, Mubi North, Mubi
South, Numan, Shelleng, Song, Toungo, Yola North, Yola South.

Yola

Akwa Ibom

Abak, Eastern Obolo, Eket, Esit Eket, Essien Udim, Etim Ekpo,
Etinan, Ibeno, Ibesikpo Asutan, Ibiono Ibom, Ika, Ikono, Ikot Abasi,
Ikot Ekpene, Ini, Itu, Mbo, Mkpat Enin, Nsit Atai, Nsit Ibom, Nsit
Ubium, Obot Akara, Okobo, Onna, Oron, Oruk Anam, Udung Uko,
Ukanafun, Uruan, Urue-Offong/Oruko, Uyo.

Uyo

Anambra

Aguata, Anambra East, Anambra West, Anaocha, Awka North, Awka
South, Ayamelum, Dunukofia, Ekwusigo, Idemili North, Idemili
south, Ihiala, Njikoka, Nnewi North, Nnewi South, Ogbaru, Onitsha
North, Onitsha South, Orumba North, Orumba South, Oyi.

Awka

Bauchi

Alkaleri, Bauchi, Bogoro, Damban, Darazo, Dass, Ganjuwa, Giade,
Itas/Gadau, Jama’are, Katagum, Kirfi, Misau, Ningi, Shira, TafawaBalewa, Toro, Warji, Zaki

Bauchi

Bayelsa

Brass, Ekeremor, Kolokuma/Opokuma, Nembe, Ogbia, Sagbama,
Southern Ijaw, Yenegoa.

Yenagoa

Benue

Ado, Agatu, Apa, Buruku, Gboko, Guma, Gwer East, Gwer West,
Katsina-Ala, Konshisha, Kwande, Logo, Makurdi, Obi, Ogbadibo, Oju,
Okpokwu, Ohimini, Oturkpo, Tarka, Ukum, Ushongo, Vandeikya.

Makurdi

Borno

Abadam, Askira/Uba, Bama, Bayo, Biu, Chibok, Damboa, Dikwa,
Gubio, Guzamala, Gwoza, Hawul, Jere, Kaga, Kala/Balge, Konduga,
Kukawa, Kwaya Kusar, Mafa, Magumeri, Maiduguri, Marte, Mobbar,
Monguno, Ngala, Nganzai, Shani.

Maiduguri

Cross River

Abi, Akamkpa, Akpabuyo, Bakassi, Bekwara, Biase, Boki, CalabarMunicipal, Calabar South, Etung, Ikom, Obanliku, Obubra, Obudu,
Odukpani, Ogoja, Yakurr, Yala

Calabar

Delta

Aniocha North, Aniocha South, Bomadi, Burutu, Ethiope East,
Ethiope West, Ika North East, Ika South, Isoko North, Isoko South,

Asaba

Ndokwa East, Ndokwa West, Okpe, Oshimili North, Oshimili South,
Patani, Sapele, Udu, Ughelli North, Ughelli South, Ukwuani, Uvwie,
Warri North, Warri South, Warri South West.
Ebonyi

Abakaliki, Afikpo North, Afikpo South, Ebonyi, Ezza North, Ezza
South, Ikwo, Ishielu, Ivo, Izzi, Ohaozara, Ohaukwu, Onicha

Abakaliki

Edo

Akoko-Edo, Egor, Esan Central, Esan North East, Esan South East,
Esan West, Etsako Central, Etsako East, Etsako West, Igueben,
Ikpoba-Okha, Oredo, Orhionmwon, Ovia North East, Ovia South
West, Owan East, Owan West, Uhunmwonde.

Benin City

Ekiti

Ado Ekiti, Aiyekire, Efon, Ekiti East, Ekiti South West, Ekiti West,
Emure, Idosi-Osi, Ijero, Ikere, Ikole, Ilemeji, Irepodun/Ifelodun,
Ise/Orun, Moba, Oye.

Ado Ekiti

Enugu

Aninri, Awgu, Enugu East, Enugu North, Enugu South, Ezeagu, IgboEtiti, Igbo-Eze North, Igbo-Eze South, Isi-Uzo, Nkanu East, Nkanu
West, Nsukka, Oji-River, Udenu, Udi, Uzo-Uwani

Enugu

Gombe

Akko, Balanga, Billiri, Dukku, Funakaye, Gombe, Kaltungo, Kwami,
Nafada, Shomgom, Yamaltu/Deba.

Gombe

Imo

Aboh-Mbaise, Ahiazu-Mbaise, Ehime-Mbano, Ezinihitte, Ideato North,
Ideato South, Ihitte/Uboma, Ikeduru, Isiala Mbano, Isu, Mbaitoli,
Ngor-Okpala, Njaba, Nwangele, Nkwerre, Obowo, Oguta,
Ohaji/Egbema, Okigwe, Orlu, Orsu, Oru East, Oru West, OwerriMunicipal, Owerri North, Owerri West, Unuimo.

Owerri

Jigawa

Auyo, Babura, Birni Kudu, Biriniwa, Buji, Dutse, Gagarawa, Garki,
Gumel, Guri, Gwaram, Gwiwa, Hadejia, Jahun, Kafin Hausa,
Kaugama Kazaure, Kiri Kasamma, Kiyawa, Maigatari, Malam Madori,
Miga, Ringim, Roni, Sule-Tankarkar, Taura, Yankwashi.

Dutse

Kaduna

Birnin-Gwari, Chikun, Giwa, Igabi, Ikara, Jaba, Jema'a, Kachia,
Kaduna North, kaduna South, Kagarko, Kajuru, kauru, Kubau,
kudan, Lere, Markafi, Sabon-Gari, Sanga, Soba, Zango-Kataf, Zaria

Kaduna

Kano

Ajingi, Albasu, Bagwai, Bebeji, Bichi, Bunkure, Dala, Dambatta,
Dawakin Kudu, Dawakin Tofa, Doguwa, Fagge, Gabasawa, Garko,
Garum Mallam, Gaya, Gezawa,Gwale, Gwarzo, Kabo, Kano Municipal,
Karaye, Kibiya, Kiru, kumbotso, Kunchi, Kura, Madobi, Makoda,
Minjibir, Nasarawa, Rano, Rimin Gado, Rogo, Shanono, Sumaila,
Takali, Tarauni, Tofa, Tsanyawa, Tudun Wada, Ungogo, Warawa,
Wudil.

Kano

Katsina

Bakori, Batagarawa, Batsari, Baure, Bindawa, Charanchi, Dandume,
Danja, Dan Musa, Daura, Dutsi, Dutsin-Ma, Faskari, Funtua, Ingawa,
Jibia, Kafur, Kaita, Kankara, Kankia, Katsina, Kurfi, Kusada,
Mai’Adua, Malumfashi, Mani, Mashi, Matazuu, Musawa, Rimi,
Sabuwa, Safana, Sandamu, Zango.

Katsina

Kebbi

Aleiro, Arewa-Dandi, Argungu, Augie, Bagudo, Birnin Kebbi, Bunza,

Birnin Kebbi

Dandi, Fakai, Gwandu, Jega, Kalgo, Koko/Besse, Maiyama, Ngaski,
Sakaba, Shanga, Suru, Wasagu/Danko, Yauri, Zuru.
Kogi

Adavi, Ajaokuta, Ankpa, Bassa, Dekina, Ibaji, Idah, Igalamela-Odolu,
Ijumu, Kabba/Bunu, Kogi, Lokoja, Mopa-Muro, Ofu,
Ogori/Mangongo, Okehi, Okene, Olamabolo, Omala, Yagba East,
Yagba West.

Lokoja

Kwara

Asa, Baruten, Edu, Ekiti, Ifelodun, Ilorin East, Ilorin West, Irepodun,
Isin, Kaiama, Moro, Offa, Oke-Ero, Oyun, Pategi.

Ilorin

Lagos

Agege, Ajeromi-Ifelodun, Alimosho, Amuwo-Odofin, Apapa, Badagry,
Epe, Eti-Osa, Ibeju/Lekki, Ifako-Ijaye, Ikeja, Ikorodu, Kosofe, Lagos
Island, Lagos Mainland, Mushin, Ojo, Oshodi-Isolo, Shomolu,
Surulere.

Ikeja

Nasarawa

Akwanga, Awe, Doma, Karu, Keana, Keffi, Kokona, Lafia, Nasarawa,
Nasarawa-Eggon, Obi, Toto, Wamba.

Lafia

Niger

Agaie, Agwara, Bida, Borgu, Bosso, Chanchaga, Edati, Gbako,
Gurara, Katcha, Kontagora, Lapai, Lavun, Magama, Mariga,
Mashegu, Mokwa, Muya, Pailoro, Rafi, Rijau, Shiroro, Suleja, Tafa,
Wushishi.

Minna

Ogun

Abeokuta North, Abeokuta South, Ado-Odo/Ota, Egbado North,
Egbado South, Ewekoro, Ifo, Ijebu East, Ijebu North, Ijebu North
East, Ijebu Ode, Ikenne, Imeko-Afon, Ipokia, Obafemi-Owode, Ogun
Waterside, Odeda, Odogbolu, Remo North, Shagamu.

Abeokuta

Ondo

Akoko North East, Akoko North West,. Akoko South Akure East,
Akoko South West, Akure North, Akure South, Ese-Odo, Idanre,
Ifedore, Ilaje, Ile-Oluji-Okeigbo, Irele, Odigbo, Okitipupa, Ondo East,
Ondo West, Ose, Owo.

Akure

Osun

Aiyedade, Aiyedire, Atakumosa East, Atakumosa West, Boluwaduro,
Boripe, Ede North, Ede South, Egbedore, Ejigbo, Ife Central, Ife
East, Ife North, Ife South, Ifedayo, Ifelodun, Ila, Ilesha East, Ilesha
West, Irepodun, Irewole, Isokan, Iwo, Obokun, Odo-Otin, OlaOluwa, Olorunda, Oriade, Orolu, Osogbo.

Oshogbo

Oyo

Afijio, Akinyele, Atiba, Atigbo, Egbeda, Ibadan Central, Ibadan
North, Ibadan North West, Ibadan South East, Ibadan South West,
Ibarapa Central, Ibarapa East, Ibarapa North, Ido, Irepo, Iseyin,
Itesiwaju, Iwajowa, Kajola, Lagelu Ogbomosho North, Ogbmosho
South, Ogo Oluwa, Olorunsogo, Oluyole, Ona-Ara, Orelope, Ori Ire,
Oyo East, Oyo West, Saki East, Saki West, Surulere.

Ibadan

Plateau

Barikin Ladi, Bassa, Bokkos, Jos East, Jos North, Jos South, Kanam,
Kanke, Langtang North, Langtang South, Mangu, Mikang, Pankshin,
Qua’an Pan, Riyom, Shendam, Wase.

Jos

Rivers

Abua/Odual, Ahoada East, Ahoada West, Akuku Toru, Andoni, AsariToru, Bonny, Degema, Emohua, Eleme, Etche, Gokana, Ikwerre,

Port-Harcourt

Khana, Obia/Akpor, Ogba/Egbema/Ndoni, Ogu/Bolo, Okrika,
Omumma, Opobo/Nkoro, Oyigbo, Port-Harcourt, Tai.
Sokoto

Binji, Bodinga, Dange-shnsi, Gada, Goronyo, Gudu, Gawabawa,
Illela, Isa, Kware, kebbe, Rabah, Sabon birni, Shagari, Silame,
Sokoto North, Sokoto South, Tambuwal, Tqngaza, Tureta, Wamako,
Wurno, Yabo.

Sokoto

Taraba

Ardo-kola, Bali, Donga, Gashaka, Cassol, Ibi, Jalingo, Karin-Lamido,
Kurmi, Lau, Sardauna, Takum. Ussa, Wukari, Yorro, Zing.

Jalingo

Yobe

Bade, Bursari, Damaturu, Fika, Fune, Geidam, Gujba, Gulani,
Jakusko, Karasuwa, Karawa, Machina, Nangere, Nguru Potiskum,
Tarmua, Yunusari, Yusufari.

Damaturu

Zamfara

Anka, Bakura, Birnin Magaji, Bukkuyum, Bungudu, Gummi, Gusau,
Kaura, Namoda, Maradun, Maru, Shinkafi, Talata Mafara. Tsafe,
Zurmi.

Gusau

Back to Page One
Part II
1. Definition of Federal Capital Territory Abuja.
The definition of the boundaries of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja referred to under
Chapters 1 and VIII of this Constitution is as follows:
Starting from the village called Izom on 7oE Longitude and 9o 15 Latitude, project a straight
line westward to a point just north of Lehu on the Kemi River, then project a line along 6 o
47 ½ ‘ E southward passing close to the villages called Semasu, Zui and Bassa down to a
place a little west of Abaji town; thence project a line along parallel 8o 27 ½ ‘N Latitude to
Ahinza village 7o 6" on Kanama River); thence a straight line to Buga Village on 8o 30 ‘N
Latitude and 7" 20’E Longitude; thence draw a line northwards joining the villages of Odu,
Karshi and Karu. From Karu the line shall proceed along the boundary between the Niger
and Plateau States as far as Kawu; thence the line shall proceed along the boundary
between Kaduna and Niger States up to a point just north of Bwari village, hence the line
goes straight to Zuba village and thence straight to Izom.
2. Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
Area Councils
Area Council

Headquarters

Abaji

Abaji

Abuja Municipal

Garki

Bwari

Bwari

Gwagwalada

Gwagwalada

Kuje

Kuje

Kwali

Kwali

Back to Page One
Second Schedule
Legislative Powers
Part I

Exclusive Legislative List
Item
1. Accounts of the Government of the Federation, and of offices, courts, and authorities
thereof, including audit of those accounts.
2. Arms, ammunition and explosives.
3. Aviation, including airports, safety of aircraft and carriage of passengers and goods by
air.
4. Awards of national titles of honour, decorations and other dignities.
5. Bankruptcy and insolvency
6. Banks, banking, bills of exchange and promissory notes.
7. Borrowing of moneys within or outside Nigeria for the purposes of the Federation or of
any State.
8. Census, including the establishment and maintenance of machinery for continuous and
universal registration of births and deaths throughout Nigeria.
9. Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens.
10. Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts.
11. Construction, alteration and maintenance of such roads as may be declared by the
National Assembly to be Federal trunk roads.
12. Control of capital issues.
13. Copyright
14. Creation of States
15. Currency, coinage and legal tender
16. Customs and excise duties
17. Defence
18. Deportation of persons who are not citizens of Nigeria
19. Designation of securities in which trust funds may be invested.
20. Diplomatic, consular and trade representation.
21. Drugs and poisons.

22. Election to the offices of President and Vice-President or Governor and Deputy Governor
and any other office to which a person may be elected under this Constitution, excluding
election to a local government council or any office in such council.
23. Evidence
24. Exchange control
25. Export duties
26. External affairs
27. Extradition
28. Fingerprints identification and criminal records.
29. Fishing and fisheries other than fishing and fisheries in rivers, lakes, waterways, ponds
and other inland waters within Nigeria.
30. Immigration into and emigration from Nigeria
31. Implementation of treaties relating to matters on this list
32. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of bodies corporate, other than co-operative
societies, local government councils and bodies corporate established directly by any Law
enacted by a House of Assembly of a State.
33. Insurance.
34. Labour, including trade unions, industrial relations; conditions, safety and welfare of
labour; industrial disputes; prescribing a national minimum wage for the Federation or any
part thereof; and industrial arbitration.
35. Legal proceedings between Governments of States or between the Government of the
Federation and Government of any State or any other authority or person.
36. Maritime shipping and navigation, including (a) shipping and navigation on tidal waters;
(b) shipping and navigation on the River Niger and its affluents and on any such other
inland waterway as may be designated by the National Assembly to be an international
waterway or to be an inter-State waterway;
(c) lighthouses, lightships, beacons and other provisions for the safety of shipping and
navigation;
(d) such ports as may be declared by the National Assembly to be Federal ports (including
the constitution and powers of port authorities for Federal ports).

37. Meteorology
38. Military (Army, Navy and Air Force) including any other branch of the armed forces of
the Federation.
39. Mines and minerals, including oil fields, oil mining, geological surveys and natural gas.
40. National parks being such areas in a State as may, with the consent of the Government
of that State, be designated by the National Assembly as national parks.
41. Nuclear energy
42. Passports and visas
43. Patents, trademarks, trade or business names, industrial designs and merchandise
marks.
44. Pensions, gratuities and other-like benefit payable out of the Consolidated Revenue
Fund or any other public funds of the Federation.
45. Police and other government security services established by law.
46. Posts, telegraphs and telephones
47. Powers of the National Assembly, and the privileges and immunities of its members
48. Prisons
49. Professional occupations as may be designated by the National Assembly.
50. Public debt of the Federation
51. Public holidays.
52. Public relations of the Federation
53. Public service of the Federation including the settlement of disputes between the
Federation and officers of such service.
54. Quarantine
55. Railways
56. Regulations of political parties
57. Service and execution in a State of the civil and criminal processes, judgements,
decrees, orders and other decisions of any court of law outside Nigeria or any court of law in
Nigeria other than a court of law established by the House of Assembly of that State.
58. Stamp duties

59. Taxation of incomes, profits and capital gains, except as otherwise prescribed by this
Constitution.
60. The establishment and regulation of authorities for the Federation or any part thereof (a) To promote and enforce the observance of the Fundamental Objectives and Directive
Principles contained in this Constitution;
(b) To identify, collect, preserve or generally look after ancient and historical monuments
and records and archaeological sites and remains declared by the National Assembly to be
of national significance or national importance;
(c) to administer museums and libraries other than museums and libraries established by
the Government of a state;
(d) To regulate tourist traffic; and
(e) To prescribe minimum standards of education at all levels.
61. The formation, annulment and dissolution of marriages other than marriages under
Islamic law and Customary law including matrimonial causes relating thereto.
62. Trade and commerce, and in particular (a) trade and commerce between Nigeria and other countries including import of
commodities into and export of commodities from Nigeria, and trade and commerce
between the states;
(b) establishment of a purchasing authority with power to acquire for export or sale in world
markets such agricultural produce as may be designated by the National Assembly;
(c) inspection of produce to be exported from Nigeria and the enforcement of grades and
standards of quality in respect of produce so inspected;
(d) establishment of a body to prescribe and enforce standards of goods and commodities
offered for sale;
(e) control of the prices of goods and commodities designated by the National Assembly as
essential goods or commodities; and
(f) registration of business names.
63. Traffic on Federal trunk roads.
64. Water from such sources as may be declared by the National Assembly to be sources
affecting more than one state
65. Weights and measures.

66. Wireless, broadcasting and television other than broadcasting and television provided
by the Government of a state; allocation of wave-lengths for wireless, broadcasting and
television transmission.
67. Any other matter with respect to which the National Assembly has power to make laws
in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
68. Any matter incidental or supplementary to any matter mentioned elsewhere in this list.

Back to Page One
Part II
Concurrent Legislative List
Extent of Federal and State Legislative powers
1. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the National Assembly may by an Act make
provisions for (a) the division of public revenue (i) between the Federation and the States;
(ii) among the States of the Federation;
(iii) between the States and local government councils;
(iv) among the local government councils in the States; and
(b) grants or loans from and the imposition of charges upon the Consolidated Revenue Fund
or any other public funds of the Federation or for the imposition of charges upon the
revenue and assets of the Federation for any purpose notwithstanding that it relates to a
matter with respect to which the National Assembly is not empowered to make laws.
2. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, any House of Assembly may make
provisions for grants or loans from and the imposition of charges upon any of the public
funds of that State or the imposition of charges upon the revenue and assets of that State
for any purpose notwithstanding that it relates to a matter with respect to which the
National Assembly is empowered to make laws.
3. The National Assembly may make laws for the Federation or any part thereof with
respect to such antiquities and monuments as may, with the consent of the State in which
such antiquities and monuments are located, be designated by the National Assembly as
National Antiquities or National Monuments but nothing in this paragraph shall preclude a
House of Assembly from making Laws for the State or any part thereof with respect to
antiquities and monuments not so designated in accordance with the foregoing provisions.
4. The National Assembly may make laws for the Federation or any part thereof with
respect to the archives and public records of the Federation.
5. A House of Assembly may, subject to paragraph 4 hereof, make laws for that State or
any part thereof with respect to archives and public records of the Government of the State.

6. Nothing in paragraphs 4 and 5 hereof shall be construed as enabling any laws to be made
which do not preserve the archives and records which are in existence at the date of
commencement of this Constitution, and which are kept by authorities empowered to do so
in any part of the Federation.
7. In the exercise of its powers to impose any tax or duty on (a) capital gains, incomes or profits or persons other than companies; and
(b) documents or transactions by way of stamp duties.
the National Assembly may, subject to such conditions as it may prescribe, provide that the
collection of any such tax or duty or the administration of the law imposing it shall be
carried out by the Government of a State or other authority of a State.
8. Where an Act of the National Assembly provides for the collection of tax or duty on
capital gains, incomes or profit or the administration of any law by an authority of a State in
accordance with paragraph 7 hereof, it shall regulate the liability of persons to such tax or
duty in such manner as to ensure that such tax or duty is not levied on the same person by
more than one State.
9. A House of Assembly may, subject to such conditions as it may prescribe, make
provisions for the collection of any tax, fee or rate or for the administration of the Law
providing for such collection by a local government council.
10. Where a Law of a House of Assembly provides for the collection of tax, fee or rate or for
the administration of such Law by a local government council in accordance with the
provisions hereof it shall regulate the liability of persons to the tax, fee or rate in such
manner as to ensure that such tax, fee or rate is not levied on the same person in respect
of the same liability by more than one local government council.
11. The National Assembly may make laws for the Federation with respect to the
registration of voters and the procedure regulating elections to a local government council.
12. Nothing in paragraph 11 hereof shall preclude a House of Assembly from making laws
with respect to election to a local government council in addition to but not inconsistent with
any law made by the National Assembly.
13. The National Assembly may make laws for the Federation or any part thereof with
respect to(a) electricity and the establishment of electric power stations;
(b) the generation and transmission of electricity in or to any part of the Federation and
from one State to another State;
(c) the regulation of the right of any person or authority to dam up or otherwise interfere
with the flow of water from sources in any part of the Federation;

(d) the participation of the Federation in any arrangement with another country for the
generation, transmission and distribution of electricity for any area partly within and partly
outside the Federation;
(f) the regulation of the right of any person or authority to use, work or operate any plant,
apparatus, equipment or work designed for the supply or use of electrical energy.
14. A House of Assembly may make laws for the State with respect to (a) electricity and the establishment in that State of electric power stations;
(b) the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity to areas not covered by a
national grid system within that State; and
(c) the establishment within that State of any authority for the promotion and management
of electric power stations established by the State.
15. In the foregoing provisions of this item, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following expressions have the meanings respectively assigned to them "distribution" means the supply of electricity from a sub-station to the ultimate consumer;
"management" includes maintenance, repairs or replacement;
"power station" means an assembly of plant or equipment for the creation or generation of
electrical energy; and
"transmission" means the supply of electricity from a power station to a sub-station or from
one sub-station to another sub-station, and the reference to a
"sub-station" herein is a reference to an assembly of plant, machinery or equipment for
distribution of electricity.
16. The National Assembly may make laws for the establishment of an authority with power
to carry out censorship of cinematograph films and to prohibit or restrict the exhibition of
such films; and nothing herein shall (a) preclude a House of Assembly from making provision for a similar authority for that
State; or
(b) authorise the exhibition of a cinematograph film in a State without the sanction of the
authority established by the Law of that State for the censorship of such films.
17. The National Assembly may make laws for the Federation or any part thereof with
respect to (a) the health, safety and welfare of persons employed to work in factories, offices or other
premises or in inter-State transportation and commerce including the training, supervision
and qualification of such persons;

(b) the regulation of ownership and control of business enterprises throughout the
Federation for the purpose of promoting, encouraging or facilitating such ownership and
control by citizens of Nigeria;
(c) the establishment of research centres for agricultural studies; and
(d) the establishment of institutions and bodies for the promotion or financing of industrial,
commercial or agricultural projects.
18. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, a House of Assembly may make Laws for
that State with respect to industrial, commercial or agricultural development of the State.
19. Nothing in the foregoing paragraphs of this item shall be construed as precluding a
House of Assembly from making Laws with respect to any of the matters referred to in the
foregoing paragraphs.
20. For the purposes of the foregoing paragraphs of this item, the word
"agricultural" includes fishery.
21. The National Assembly may make laws to regulate or co-ordinate scientific and
technological research throughout the Federation.
22. Nothing herein shall prelude a House of Assembly from establishing or making
provisions for an institution or other arrangement for the purpose of scientific and
technological research.
23. The National Assembly may make laws for the Federation or any part thereof with
respect to statistics so far as the subject matter relates to (a) any matter upon which the National Assembly has power to make laws; and
(b) the organisation of co-ordinated scheme of statistics for the Federation or any part
thereof on any matter whether or not it has power to make laws with respect thereto.
24. A House of Assembly may make Laws for the State with respect to statistics and on any
matter other than that referred to in paragraph 23
(a) of this item.
25. The National Assembly may make laws for the Federation or any part thereof with
respect to trigonometrical, cadastral and topographical surveys.
26. A House of Assembly may, subject to paragraph 25 hereof, make laws for that State or
any part thereof with respect to trigonometrical, cadastral and topographical surveys.
27. The National Assembly shall have power to make laws for the Federation or any part
thereof with respect to university education, technological education or such professional
education as may from time to time be designated by the National Assembly.

28. The power conferred on the National Assembly under paragraph 27 of this item shall
include power to establish an institution for the purposes of university, post-primary,
technological or professional education.
29. Subject as herein provided, a House of Assembly shall have power to make laws for the
state with respect to the establishment of an institution for purposes of university,
technological or professional education.
30. Nothing in the foregoing paragraphs of this item shall be construed so as to limit the
powers of a House of Assembly to make laws for the State with respect to technical,
vocational, post-primary, primary or other forms of education, including the establishment
of institutions for the pursuit of such education.

Back to Page One
Part III
Supplemental and Interpretation
1. Where by this Schedule the National Assembly is required to designate any matter or
thing or to make any declaration, it may do so either by an Act of the National Assembly or
by a resolution passed by both Houses of the National Assembly.
2. In this Schedule, references to incidental and supplementary matters include, without
prejudice to their generality, references to:
(a) offences;
(b) the jurisdiction, powers, practice and procedure of courts of law; and
(c) the acquisition and tenure of land.

Back to Page One

Third Schedule
Part I
Federal Executive Bodies
(Established by Section 153)
A - Code of Conduct Bureau
1. The Code of Conduct Bureau shall comprise the following members:
(a) a Chairman; and
(b) nine other members, each of whom, at the time of appointment,
shall not be less than fifty years of age and subject to the provisions
of section 157 of this Constitution shall vacate his office on attaining
the age of seventy years.
2. The Bureau shall establish such offices in each state of the Federation as it may require
for the discharge of its functions under this Constitution.
3. The Bureau shall have power to:
(a) receive declarations by public officers made under paragraph 12 of Part I of the Fifth
Schedule to this Constitution;

(b) examine the declarations in accordance with the requirements of the Code of Conduct or
any law;
(c) retain custody of such declarations and make them available for inspection by any
citizen of Nigeria on such terms and conditions as the National Assembly may prescribe;
(d) ensure compliance with and, where appropriate, enforce the provisions of the Code of
Conduct of any law relating thereto;
(e) receive complaints about non-compliance with or breach of the provisions of the Code of
Conduct or any law in relation thereto, investigate the complaint and, where appropriate,
refer such matters to the Code of Conduct Tribunal;
(f) appoint, promote, dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over the staff of the Codes of
Conduct Bureau in accordance with the provisions of an Act of the National Assembly
enacted in that behalf; and
(g) carry out such other functions as may be conferred upon it by the National Assembly.
4.

The terms and conditions of service of the staff of the Code of Conduct Bureau shall
be the same as those provided for public officers in the civil service of the
Federation.

Back to Page One

B - Council of State
5. The Council of State shall comprise the following persons:
(a) the President, who shall be the Chairman;
(b) the Vice-President, who shall be the Deputy Chairman;
(c) all former Presidents of the Federation and all former Heads of
the Government of the Federation;
(d) all former Chief Justices of Nigeria;
(e) the President of the Senate;
(f) the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
(g) all the Governors of the states of the Federation; and
(h) the Attorney-General of the Federation.
(6.) The Council shall have power to:
(a) advise the President in the exercise of his powers with respect to
the:-

(i) national population census and compilation, publication
and keeping of records and other information concerning the
same;
(ii) prerogative of mercy;
(iii) award of national honours;
(iv) the Independent National Electoral Commission (including
the appointment of members of that Commission);
(v) the National Judicial Council (including the appointment of
the members, other than ex-officio members of that Council);
and
(vi) the National Population Commission (including the
appointment of members of that Commission); and
(b) advise the President whenever requested to do so on the
maintenance of public order within the Federation or any part thereof
and on such other matters as the President may direct.
C - Federal Character Commission
7. (1) The Federal Character Commission shall comprise the following members:
(a) a Chairman; and
(b) one person to represent each of the states of the Federation and the Federal Capital
Territory, Abuja.
(2) The Chairman and members shall be appointed by the President, subject to confirmation
by the Senate.
8. (1) In giving effect to the provisions of section 14(3) and (4) of this Constitution, the
Commission shall have the power to:
(a) work out an equitable formula subject to the approval of the
National Assembly for the distribution of all cadres of posts in the
public service of the Federation and of the States, the armed forces
of the Federation, the Nigeria Police Force and other government
security agencies, government owned companies and parastatals of
the states;
(b) promote, monitor and enforce compliance with the principles of
proportional sharing of all bureaucratic, economic, media and
political posts at all levels of government;
(c) take such legal measures, including the prosecution of the head
or staff of any Ministry or government body or agency which fails to
comply with any federal character principle or formula prescribed or
adopted by the Commission; and

(d) carry out such other functions as may be conferred upon it by an
Act of the National Assembly.
(2) The posts mentioned in sub-paragraph (1)(a) and (b) of this paragraph shall include
those of the Permanent Secretaries, Directors-General in Extra-Ministerial Departments and
parastatals, Directors in Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Departments, senior military
officers, senior diplomatic posts and managerial cadres in the Federal and State parastatals,
bodies, agencies and institutions.
(3) Notwithstanding any provision in any other law or enactment, the Commission shall
ensure that every public company or corporation reflects the federal character in the
appointments of its directors and senior management staff.
9. It shall be the duty of the Board of Directors of every state-owned enterprise to recognise
and promote the principle of federal character in the ownership and management structure
of the company.

Back to Page One
D - Federal Civil Service Commission
10. The Federal Civil Service Commission shall comprise the following members (a) a Chairman; and
(b) not more than fifteen other members, who shall, in the opinion of the President, be
persons of unquestionable integrity and sound political judgment.
11. (1) The Commission shall without prejudice to the powers vested in the President, the
National Judicial Council, the Federal Judicial Service Commission, the National Population
Commission and the Police Service Commission, have power (a) to appoint persons to offices in the Federal Civil Service; and
(b) to dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over persons holding such offices.
(2) The Commission shall not exercise any of its powers under sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph in respect of such offices of heads of divisions of Ministries or of departments of
the government of the Federation as may, from time to time, be designated by an order
made by the President except after consultation with the Head of the Civil Service of the
Federation.
E - Federal Judicial Service Commission
12. The Federal Judicial Service Commission shall comprise the following members (a) the Chief Justice of Nigeria, who shall be the Chairman;
(b) the President of the Court of Appeal;
(c) the Attorney-General of the Federation;
(d) the Chief Judge of the Federal High Court;

(e) two persons, each of whom has been qualified to practice as a
legal practitioner in Nigeria for a period of not less than fifteen years,
from a list of not less than four persons so qualified and
recommended by the Nigerian Bar Association; and
(f) two other persons, not being legal practitioners, who in the
opinion of the President are of unquestionable integrity.
13. The Commission shall have power to (a) advise the National Judicial Council in nominating persons for appointment, as respects
appointments to the office of (i) the Chief Justice of Nigeria;
(ii) a Justice of the Supreme Court;
(iii) the President of the Court of Appeal;
(iv) a Justice of the Court of Appeal;
(v) the Chief Judge of the Federal High Court;
(vi) a Judge of the Federal High Court; and
(iv) the Chairman and members of the Code of Conduct
Tribunal.
(b) recommend to the National Judicial Council, the removal from office of the judicial
officers specified in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph; and
(c) appoint, dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over the Chief Registrars and Deputy
Chief Registrars of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the Federal High Court and all
other members of the staff of the judicial service of the Federation not otherwise specified in
this Constitution and of the Federal Judicial Service Commission.

Back to Page One
F - Independent National Electoral Commission
14. (1) The Independent National Electoral Commission shall comprise the following
members (a) a Chairman, who shall be the Chief Electoral Commissioner; and
(b) twelve other members to be known as National Electoral Commissioners, who shall be
persons of unquestionably integrity and not less than fifty years and forty years of age,
respectively.
(2) There shall be for each State of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja,
a Resident Electoral Commissioner who shall (a) be appointed by the President;

(b) be persons of unquestionable integrity;
(c) not be less than forty years of age.
15. The Commission shall have power to (a) organise, undertake and supervise all elections to the offices of the President and VicePresident, the Governor and Deputy Governor of a State, and to the membership of the
Senate, the House of Representatives and the House of Assembly of each State of the
Federation;
(b) register political parties in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and an Act
of the National Assembly;
(c) monitor the organisation and operation of the political parties, including their finances;
(d) arrange for the annual examination and auditing of the funds and accounts of political
parties, and publish a report on such examination and audit for public information;
(e) arrange and conduct the registration of persons qualified to vote and prepare, maintain
and revise the register of voters for the purpose of any election under this Constitution;
(f) monitor political campaigns and provide rules and regulations which shall govern the
political parties;
(g) ensure that all Electoral Commissioners, Electoral and Returning Officers take and
subscribe the Oath of Office prescribed by law;
(h) delegate any of its powers to any Resident Electoral Commissioner; and
(i) carry out such other functions as may be conferred upon it by an Act of the National
Assembly.
G - National Defence Council
16. The National Defence Council shall comprise the following members (a) the President who shall be the Chairman;
(b) the Vice-President who shall be the Deputy Chairman;
(c) the Minister of the Government of the Federation responsible for defence;
(d) the Chief of Defence Staff;
(e) the Chief of Army Staff;
(f) the Chief of Naval Staff;
(g) the Chief of Air Staff; and
(h) such other members as the President may appoint.

17. The Council shall have power to advise the President on matters relating to the defence
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Nigeria.
H - National Economic Council
18. The National Economic Council shall comprise the following members (a) the Vice-President who shall be the Chairman;
(b) the Governor of each State of the Federation; and
(c) the Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria established under the Central Bank of
Nigeria Decree 1991 or any enactment replacing that Decree.
19. The National Economic Council shall have power to advise the President concerning the
economic affairs of the Federation, and in particular on measures necessary for the coordination of the economic planning efforts or economic programmes of the various
Governments of the Federation.

Back to Page One
I - National Judicial Council
20. The National Judicial Council shall comprise the following members (a) the Chief Justice of Nigeria who shall be the Chairman
(b) the next most senior Justice of the Supreme Court who shall be the Deputy Chairman;
(c) the President of the Court of Appeal;
(d) five retired Justices selected by the Chief Justice of Nigeria from the Supreme Court or
Court of Appeal;
(e) the Chief Judge of the Federal High Court;
(f) five Chief Judges of States to be appointed by the Chief Justice of Nigeria from among
the Chief Judges of the States and of the High Court of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
in rotation to serve for two years;
(g) one Grand Kadi to be appointed by the Chief Justice of Nigeria from among Grand Kadis
of the Sharia Courts of Appeal to serve in rotation for two years;
(h) one President of the Customary Court of Appeal to be appointed by the Chief Justice of
Nigeria from among the Presidents of the Customary Courts of Appeal to serve in rotation
for two years;
(i) five members of the Nigerian Bar Association who have been qualified to practice for a
period of not less than fifteen years, at least one of whom shall be a Senior Advocate of
Nigeria, appointed by the Chief Justice of Nigeria on the recommendation of the National
Executive Committee of the Nigerian Bar Association to serve for two years and subject to
re-appointment.
Provided that the five members shall sit in the Council only for the purposes of considering
the names of persons for appointment to the superior courts of record; and

(j) two persons not being legal practitioners, who in the opinion of the Chief Justice of
Nigeria, are of unquestionable integrity.
21. The National Judicial Council shall have power to (a) recommend to the President from among the list of persons submitted to it by (i) the Federal Judicial Service Commission, persons for appointment to the offices of the
Chief Justice of Nigeria, the Justices of the Supreme Court, the President and Justices of the
Court of Appeal, the Chief Judge and Judges of the Federal High Court, and
(ii) the Judicial Service Committee of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, persons for
appointment to the offices of the Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court of the Federal
Capital Territory, Abuja, the Grand Kadi and Kadis of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the
Federal Capital Territory, Abuja and the President and Judges of the Customary Court of
Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja;
(b) recommend to the President the removal from office of the judicial officers specified in
sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph and to exercise disciplinary control over such officers;
(c) recommend to the Governors from among the list of persons submitted to it by the State
Judicial Service Commissions persons for appointments to the offices of the Chief Judges of
the States and Judges of the High Courts of the States, the Grand Kadis and Kadis of the
Sharia Courts of Appeal of the States and the Presidents and Judges of the Customary
Courts of Appeal of the States;
(d) recommend to the Governors the removal from the office of the judicial officers in subparagraph (c) of this paragraph, and to exercise disciplinary control over such officers.
(e) collect, control and disburse all moneys, capital and recurrent, for the judiciary;
(f) advise the President and Governors or any matter pertaining to the judiciary as may be
referred to the Council by the President or the Governors;
(g) appoint, dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over members and staff of the Council;
(h) control and disburse all monies, capital and recurrent; for the services of the Council;
and
(i) deal with all other matters relating to broad issues of policy and administration.
22. The Secretary of the Council shall be appointed by the National Judicial Council on the
recommendation of the Federal Judicial Service Commission and shall be a legal
practitioner.
J - National Population Commission
23. The National Population Commission shall comprise the following members (a) a Chairman; and
(b) one person from each State of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.

24. The Commission shall have power to (a) undertake periodical enumeration of population through sample surveys, censuses or
otherwise;
(b) establish and maintain a machinery for continuous and universal registration of births
and deaths throughout the Federation;
(c) advise the President on population matters;
(d) publish and provide information and data on population for the purpose of facilitating
economic and development planning; and
(e) appoint and train or arrange for the appointment and training of enumerators or the
staff of the Commission.
K - National Security Council
25. The National Security Council shall comprise the following members (a) the President who shall be the Chairman;
(b) the Vice-President who shall be the Deputy Chairman;
(c) the Chief of Defence Staff;
(d) the Minister of the Government of the Federation charged with the responsibility for
internal affairs.
(e) the Minister of the Government of the Federation charged responsibility for defence;
(f) the Minister of the Government of the Federation charged with the responsibility for
foreign affairs;
(g) the National Security Adviser
(h) the Inspector-General of Police; and
(i) such other persons as the President may in his discretion appoint.
26. The Council shall have power to advise the President on matters relating to public
security including matters relating to any organisation or agency established by law for
ensuring the security of the Federation.

Back to Page One
L - Nigeria Police Council
27. The Nigeria Police Council shall comprise the following members (a) the President who shall be the Chairman;
(b) the Governor of each State of the Federation;

(c) the Chairman of the Police Service Commission; and
(d) the Inspector-General of Police
28. The functions of the Nigeria Police Council shall include (a) the organisation and administration of the Nigeria Police Force and all other matters
relating thereto (not being matters relating to the use and operational control of the Force
or the appointment, disciplinary control and dismissal of members of the Force);
(b) the general supervision of the Nigeria Police Force; and
(c) advising the President on the appointment of the Inspector-General of Police.
M - Police Service Commission
29. The Police Service Commission shall comprise the following members (a) a Chairman; and
(b) such number of other persons, not less than seven but not more than nine, as may be
prescribed by an Act of the National Assembly.
30. The Commission shall have power to (a) appoint persons to offices (other than office of the Inspector-General of Police) in the
Nigeria Police Force; and
(b) dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over persons holding any office referred to in
sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph.
N - Revenue Mobilisation Allocation and Fiscal Commission
31. The Revenue Mobilisation Allocation and Fiscal Commission shall comprise the following
members (a) a Chairman; and
(b) one member from each State of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
who in the opinion of the President are persons of unquestionable integrity with requisite
qualifications and experience.
32. The Commission shall have power to (a) monitor the accruals to and disbursement of revenue from the Federation Account;
(b) review, from time to time, the revenue allocation formulae and principles in operation to
ensure conformity with changing realities.
Provided that any revenue formula which has been accepted by an Act of the National
Assembly shall remain in force for a period of not less than five years from the date of
commencement of the Act;

(c) advise the Federal and State Governments on fiscal efficiency and methods by which
their revenue can be increased;
(d) determine the remuneration appropriate for political office holders, including the
President, Vice-President, Governors, Deputy Governors, Ministers, Commissioners, Special
Advisers, Legislators and the holders of the offices mentioned in sections 84 and 124 of this
Constitution; and
(e) discharge such other functions as are conferred on the Commission by this Constitution
or any Act of the National Assembly.

Back to Page One
Part II
State's Executive Bodies
(Established by section 197)
A - State Civil Service Commission
1. A State Civil Service Commission shall comprise the following members (a) a Chairman; and
(b) not less than two and not more than four other persons, who shall, in the opinion of the
Governor, be persons of unquestionable integrity and sound political judgment.
2. (1) The Commission shall have power without prejudice to the powers vested in the
Governor and the State Judicial Service Commission to (a) appoint persons to offices in the State civil service; and
(b) dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over persons holding such offices.
2. The Commission shall not exercise any of its powers under sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph in respect of such offices of heads of divisions of Ministries or of departments of
the Government of the State as may from time to time be designated by an order made by
the Governor except after consultation with the Head of the Civil Service of the State.
B - State Independent Electoral Commission
3. A State Independent Electoral Commission shall comprise the following members (a) a Chairman; and
(b) not less than five but not more than seven other persons.
4. The Commission shall have power(a) to organise, undertake and supervise all elections to local government councils within
the State.
(b) to render such advice as it may consider necessary to the Independent National
Electoral Commission on the compilation of and the register of voters in so far as that
register is applicable to local government elections in the State.

Back to Page One

C - State Judicial Service Commission
5. A State Judicial Service Commission shall comprise the following members (a) the Chief Judge of the State, who shall be the Chairman;
(b) the Attorney General of the State;
(c) the Grand Kadi of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the State, if any;
(d) the President of the Customary Court of Appeal of the State, if any;
(e) two members, who are legal practitioners, and who have been qualified to practice as
legal practitioners in Nigeria for not less than ten years; and
(f) two other persons, not being legal practitioners, who in the opinion of the Governor are
of unquestionable integrity.
6. The Commission shall have power to (a) advise the National Judicial Council on suitable persons for nomination to the office of (i) the Chief Judge of the State
(ii) the Grand Kadi of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the State, if any,
(iii) the President of the Customary Court of Appeal of the State, if any,
(iii) the President of the Customary Court of Appeal of the State, if any,
(iv) Judges of the High Court of the State,
(v) Kadis of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the State, if any, and
(vi) Judges of the Customary Court of Appeal of the State, if any;
(b) subject to the provisions of this Constitution, to recommend to the National Judicial
Council the removal from the office of the judicial officers specified in sub-paragraph (a) of
this paragraph; and
(c) to appoint, dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over the Chief Registrar and Deputy
Chief Registrar of the High Court, the Chief Registrars of the Sharia Court of Appeal and
Customary Court of Appeal, Magistrates, Judges and members of Area Courts and
Customary Courts and all other members of the staff of the judicial service of the State not
otherwise specified in this Constitution.

Back to Page One
Part III
Federal Capital Territory, Abuja Executive Body
(Established under Section 304)
Judicial Service Committee of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja

1. The Judicial Service Committee of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja shall comprise the
following members (a) the Chief Judge of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja who shall be the Chairman.
(b) the Attorney-General of the Federation;
(c) the Grand Kadi of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja;
(d) the President of the Customary Court of Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja;
(e) one person who is a legal practitioner and who has been qualified to practice as a legal
practitioner in Nigeria for a period of not less than twelve years; and
(f) one other person, not being practitioner, who in the opinion of the President is of
unquestionable integrity.
2. The Committee shall have power (a) to recommend to the National Judicial Council suitable persons for nomination for
appointment to the office of (i) the Chief Judge of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja,
(ii) a Judge of the High Court of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja,
(iii) the Grand Kadi of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
(iv) the President of the Customary Court of Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja,
(v) a Kadi of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja,
(vi) a Judge of the Customary Court of Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
(b) subject to the provisions of this Constitution, to recommend to the National Judicial
Council the removal from office of the Judicial officers specified in sub-paragraph (a) of this
paragraph;
(c) to appoint, promote and exercise disciplinary control over the Chief Registrar and
Deputy Chief Registrars of the High Court, the Sharia Court of Appeal and the Customary
Court of Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, magistrates, the judges and
members of the District and Area Courts of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, if any, and
all other members of the staff of the judicial service of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja
not otherwise specified in this Constitution and of the Judicial Service Committee of the
Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.

Back to Page One
Fourth Schedule
Functions of a Local Government Council
Functions of a Local Government Council
1. The main functions of a local government council are as follows:

(a) the consideration and the
making of recommendations to
a State commission on
economic planning or any
similar body on (i)
th
e
ec
on
o
mi
c
de
ve
lo
p
m
en
t
of
th
e
St
at
e,
pa
rti
cu
la
rl
y
in
so
fa
r
as
th
e
ar
ea
s
of
au
th
or
it
y
of
th
e
co

u
nc
il
an
d
of
th
e
St
at
e
ar
e
af
fe
ct
ed
,
an
d
(ii
)
pr
op
os
al
s
m
ad
e
by
th
e
sa
id
co
m
mi
ss
io
n
or
bo
dy
;
(b) collection of rates, radio and television
licences;

(c) establishment and maintenance of
cemeteries, burial grounds and homes for the
destitute or infirm;
(d) licensing of bicycles, trucks (other than
mechanically propelled trucks), canoes, wheel
barrows and carts;
(e) establishment, maintenance and
regulation of slaughter houses, slaughter
slabs, markets, motor parks and public
conveniences;
(f) construction and maintenance of roads,
streets, street lightings, drains and other
public highways, parks, gardens, open
spaces, or such public facilities as may be
prescribed from time to time by the House of
Assembly of a State;
(g) naming of roads and streets and
numbering of houses;
(h) provision and maintenance of public
conveniences, sewage and refuse disposal;
(i) registration of all births, deaths and
marriages;
(j) assessment of privately owned houses or
tenements for the purpose of levying such
rates as may be prescribed by the House of
Assembly of a State; and
(k) control and regulation of (i)
ou
tdo
or
ad
ve
rti
si
n
g
an
d
ho
ar

di
n
g,
(ii
)
m
ov
e
m
en
t
an
d
ke
ep
in
g
of
pe
ts
of
all
de
sc
ri
pt
io
n,
(ii
i)
sh
op
s
an
d
ki
os
ks
,
(i
v)
re
st
au
ra
nt
s,
ba
ke

ri
es
an
d
ot
he
r
pl
ac
es
fo
r
sa
le
of
fo
od
to
th
e
p
u
bli
c,
(v
)
la
u
n
dr
ie
s,
an
d
(v
i)
lic
en
si
n
g,
re
g
ul
at
io
n
an
d
co
nt

ro
l
of
th
e
sa
le
of
liq
uo
r.
2. The functions of a local government council
shall include participation of such council in
the Government of a State as respects the
following matters a.

the provision and maintenance of primary, adult and
vocational education;
(b)
the
de
vel
op
me
nt
of
agr
icul
tur
e
an
d
nat
ura
l
res
our
ces
,
oth
er
tha
n
the
ex
plo
itat
ion
of
ma

teri
als
(c)
the
pro
visi
on
an
d
ma
int
en
anc
e
of
he
alt
h
ser
vic
es;
an
d
(d)
suc
h
oth
er
fun
cti
on
s
as
ma
y
be
co
nfe
rre
d
on
a
loc
al
go
ver
nm
ent
co
un
cil

by
the
Ho
use
of
Ass
em
bly
of
the
Sta
te.

Back to Page One
Fifth Schedule
Part I
Code of Conduct for Public Officers
General
1. A public officer shall not put himself in a position where his personal interest conflicts
with his duties and responsibilities.
2. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing paragraph, a public officer shall not
(a) receive or be paid the emoluments of any public office at the
same time as he receives or is paid the emoluments of any other
public office; or
3. The President, Vice -President, Governor, Deputy Governor, Ministers of the Government
of the Federation and Commissioners of the Governments of the States, members of the
National Assembly and of the Houses of Assembly of the States, and such other public
officers or persons as the National Assembly may by law prescribe shall not maintain or
operate a bank account in any country outside Nigeria.
4. (1) A public officer shall not, after his retirement from public service and while receiving
pension from public funds, accept more than one remuneration position as chairman,
director or employee of (a) a company owned or controlled by the government; or
(b) any public authority.
(2) a retired public servant shall not receive any other remuneration from public funds in
addition to his pension and the emolument of such one remunerative position.
5. (1) Retired public officers who have held offices to which this paragraph applies are
prohibited from service or employment in foreign companies or foreign enterprises.
(2) This paragraph applies to the offices of President, Vice-President, Chief Justice of
Nigeria, Governor and Deputy governor of a State.

6. (1) A public officer shall not ask for or accept property or benefits of any kind for himself
or any other person on account of anything done or omitted to be done by him in the
discharge of his duties.
(2) for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the receipt by a public officer
of any gifts or benefits from commercial firms, business enterprises or persons who have
contracts with the government shall be presumed to have been received in contravention of
the said sub-paragraph unless the contrary is proved.
(3) A public officer shall only accept personal gifts or benefits from relatives or personal
friends to such extent and on such occasions as are recognised by custom:
Provided that any gift or donation to a public officer on any public or ceremonial occasion
shall be treated as a gift to the appropriate institution represented by the public officer, and
accordingly, the mere acceptance or receipt of any such gift shall not be treated as a
contravention of this provision.
7. The President or Vice-President, Governor or Deputy Governor, Minister of the
Government of the Federation or Commissioner of the Government of a State, or any other
public officer who holds the office of a Permanent Secretary or head of any public
corporation, university, or other parastatal organisation shall not accept (a) a loan, except from government or its agencies, a bank,
building society, mortgage institution or other financial institution
recognised by law,; and
(b) any benefit of whatever nature from any company,
contractor, or businessman, or the nominee or agent of such
person:
Provided that the head of a public corporation or of a university
or other parastatal organisation may, subject to the rules and
regulations of the body, accept a loan from such body.
8. No persons shall offer a public officer any property, gift or benefit of any kind as an
inducement or bribe for the granting of any favour or the discharge in his favour of the
public officer’s duties.
9. A public officer shall not do or direct to be done, in abuse of his office, any arbitrary act
prejudicial to the rights of any other person knowing that such act is unlawful or contrary to
any government policy.
10. A public officer shall not be a member of, belong to, or take part in any society the
membership of which is incompatible with the functions or dignity of his office.
11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, every public officer shall within three
months after the coming into force of this Code of Conduct or immediately after taking
office and thereafter (a) at the end of every four years; and

(b) at the end of his term of office, submit to the Code of
Conduct Bureau a written declaration of all his properties, assets,
and liabilities and those of his unmarried children under the age
of eighteen years.
(2) Any statement in such declaration that is found to be false by any authority or person
authorised in that behalf to verify it shall be deemed to be a breach of this Code.
(3) Any property or assets acquired by a public officer after any declaration required under
this Constitution and which is not fairly attributable to income, gift, or loan approved by this
Code shall be deemed to have been acquired in breach of this Code unless the contrary is
proved.
12. Any allegation that a public officer has committed a breach of or has not complied with
the provisions of this Code shall be made to the Code of Conduct Bureau.
13. A public officer who does any act prohibited by this Code through a nominee, trustee, or
other agent shall be deemed ipso facto to have committed a breach of this Code,
14. In its application to public officers (a) Members of legislative houses shall be exempt from the
provisions of paragraph 4 of this Code; and
(b) the National Assembly may by law exempt any cadre of
public officers from the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 11 of this
Code if it appears to it that their position in the public service is
below the rank which it considers appropriate for the application
of those provisions.
Code of Conduct Tribunal
15. (1) There shall be established a tribunal to be known as Code of Conduct Tribunal which
shall consist of a Chairman and two other persons.
(2) The Chairman shall be a person who has held or is qualified to hold office as a Judge of
a Court of record in Nigeria and shall receive such remuneration as may be prescribed by
law.
(3) The Chairman and members of the Code of Conduct Tribunal shall be appointed by the
President in accordance with the recommendation of the National Judicial Council.
(4) The National Assembly may by law confer on the Code of Conduct Tribunal such
additional powers as may appear to it to necessary to enable it more effectively to discharge
the functions conferred on it in this Schedule.
16. (1) The tenure of office of the staff of the Code of Conduct Tribunal shall, subject to the
provisions of this Code, be the same as that provided for in respect of officers in the civil
service of the Federation.
(2) The power to appoint the staff of the Code of Conduct Tribunal and to exercise
disciplinary control over them shall vest in the members of the Code of Conduct Tribunal

and shall be exercisable in accordance with the provisions of an Act of the National
Assembly enacted in that behalf.
17. (1) Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, a person holding the office of Chairman
or member of the Code of Conduct Tribunal shall vacate his office when he attains the age
of seventy years.
(2) A person who has held office as Chairman or member of the Code of Conduct Tribunal
for a period of not less than ten years shall, if he retires at the age of seventy years, be
entitled to pension for life at a rate equivalent to his last annual salary in addition to other
retirement benefits to which he may be entitled.
(3) A person holding the office of Chairman or member of the Code of Conduct Tribunal
shall not be removed from his office or appointment by the President except upon an
address supported by two-thirds majority of each House of the National Assembly praying
that he be so removed for inability to discharge the functions of the office in question
(whether arising from infirmity of mind or body) or for misconduct or for contravention of
this Code.
(4) A person holding the office of Chairman or member of the Code of Conduct Tribunal
shall not be removed from office before retiring age save in accordance with the provisions
of this Code.
18. (1) Where the Code of Conduct Tribunal finds a public officer guilty of contravention of
any of the provisions of this Code it shall impose upon that officer any of the punishments
specified under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph and such other punishment as may be
prescribed by the National Assembly.
(2) The punishment which the Code of Conduct Tribunal may impose shall include any of the
following (a) vacation of office or seat in any legislative house, as the case
may be;
(b) disqualification from membership of a legislative house and
from the holding of any public office for a period not exceeding
ten years; and
(c) seizure and forfeiture to the State of any property acquired in
abuse or corruption of office.
(3) The sanctions mentioned in sub-paragraph (2) hereof shall
be without prejudice to the penalties that may be imposed by
any law where the conduct is also a criminal offence.
(4) Where the Code of Conduct Tribunal gives a decision as to
whether or not a person is guilty of a contravention of any of
the provisions of this Code, an appeal shall lie as of right from
such decision or from any punishment imposed on such person
to the Court of Appeal at the instance of any party to the
proceedings.

(5) Any right of appeal to the Court of Appeal from the
decisions of the Code of Conduct Tribunal conferred by subparagraph (4) hereof shall be exercised in accordance with the
provisions of an Act of the National Assembly and rules of
court for the time being in force regulating the powers,
practice and procedure of the Court of Appeal.
(6) Nothing in this paragraph shall prejudice the prosecution of
a public officer punished under this paragraph or preclude
such officer from being prosecuted or punished for an offence
in a court of law.
(7) The provisions of this Constitution relating to prerogative
of mercy shall not apply to any punishment imposed in
accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
Interpretation
19. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires -"assets" includes any property,
movable and immovable and incomes owned by a person;
"business" means any profession, vocation, trade, or any adventure or concern in the
nature of trade and excludes farming;
"child" includes a step-child, a lawfully adopted child, a child born out of wedlock and any
child to whom any individual stands in place of a parent;
"emolument" means any salary, wage, over-time or leave pay, commission, fee, bonus,
gratuity, benefit, advantage (whether or not that advantage is capable of being turned into
money or money's worth), allowance, pension or annuity paid, given or granted in respect
of any employment or office;
"foreign companies" or "foreign enterprises" means companies or enterprises in which the
Government, its agencies or citizens of Nigeria or whose policies are determined by persons
or organisations outside Nigeria;
"liabilities" includes responsibilities according to law to satisfy a debt, duty or obligation
quantifiable in monetary value, instant and contingent;
"misconduct" means breach of the Oath of Allegiance or oath of office of a member or
breach of the provisions of this Constitution or a misconduct of such nature as amounts to
bribery or corruption or false declaration of assets and liabilities;
"public office" means a person holding any of the offices specified in Part II of this Schedule;
and
"public office" shall not include the chairmanship or membership of ad hoc tribunals,
commissions or committees

Back to Page One
Part II

Public Officers for the purposes of the Code of conduct
1. The President of the Federation.
2. The Vice-President of the Federation.
3. The President and Deputy President of the Senate Speakers and Deputy Speaker of the
House of Representatives and Speakers and Deputy Speakers of Houses of Assembly of
States, and all members and staff of legislative houses.
4. Governors and Deputy Governors of States.
5. Chief Justice of Nigeria, Justices of the Supreme Court, President and Justices of the
Court of Appeal, all other judicial officers and all staff of courts of law.
6. Attorney-General of the Federation and Attorney-General of each State.
7. Ministers of the Government of the Federation and Commissioners of the Governments of
the States.
8. Chief of Defence Staff, Chief of Army Staff, Chief of Naval Staff, Chief of Air Staff and all
members of the armed forces of the Federation.
9. Inspector-General of Police, Deputy Inspector-General of Police and all members of the
Nigeria Police Force and other government security agencies established by law.
10. Secretary to the Government of the Federation, Head of the Civil service, Permanent
Secretaries, Directors-Generals and all other persons in the civil service of the Federation or
of the State.
11. Ambassadors, High Commissioners and other officers of Nigeria Missions abroad.
12. Chairman, members and staff of the Code of Conduct Bureau and Code of Conduct
Tribunal.
13. Chairman, members and staff of local government councils.
14. Chairman and members of the Boards or other governing bodies and staff of statutory
corporations and of companies in which the Federal or State Governments or local
governments councils.
15. All staff of universities, colleges and institutions owned and financed by the Federal or
State Governments or local government councils.
16. Chairman, members and staff of permanent commissions or councils appointed on full
time basis.

Back to Page One
Sixth Schedule

Election Tribunals
A-National Assembly Election Tribunal
1. (1) A National Assembly Election Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and four other
members.
(2) The Chairman shall be a Judge of a High Court and the four other members shall be
appointed from among Judges of a High Court, Kadis of a Sharia Court of Appeal, Judges of
a Customary Court of Appeal or other members of the judiciary not below the rank of a
Chief Magistrate.
(3) The Chairman and other members shall be appointed by the President of the Court of
Appeal in consultation with the Judge of the State, the Grand Kadi of the Sharia Court of
Appeal of the State or the President of the Customary Court of Appeal of the State, as the
case may be.
B - Governorship and Legislative House Election Tribunal
2. (1) A Governorship and Legislative Houses Election Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman
and four other members.
(2) The Chairman shall be a Judge of a High Court and the four other members shall be
appointed from among Judges of a High Court, Kadis of a Sharia Court of Appeal, Judges of
a Customary Court of Appeal or members of the judiciary not below the rank of a Chief
Magistrate.
(3) The Chairman and other members shall be appointed by the President of the Court of
Appeal in consultation with the Chief Judge of the State, the Grand Kadi of the Sharia Court
of Appeal of the State or the President of the Customary Court of Appeal of the State, as the
case may be.

Back to Page One
Seventh Schedule
Oaths
Oaths of Allegiance
1, ………. Do solemnly swear/affirm that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the
Federal Republic of Nigeria and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria
So help me God
Oath of Office of President
I, .............. do solemnly swear/affirm that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the
Federal Republic of Nigeria; that as President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, I will
discharge my duties to the best of my ability, faithfully and in accordance with the
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and the law, and always in the interest of the
sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria; that I will strive to preserve the Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of
State Policy contained in the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that I will not
allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions; that I will
to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria; that I will abide by the Code of Conduct contained in the Fifth Schedule
to the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that in all circumstances, I will do
right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will;
that I will not directly or indirectly communication or reveal to any person any matter which

shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as President of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria, except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties
as President; and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of
Nigeria. So help me God.
Oath of Office of Governor of a State
I, ......... do solemnly swear/affirm that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the
Federal Republic of Nigeria; that as the Governor of ......... State, I will discharge my duties
to the best of my ability, faithfully and in accordance with the Constitution of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria and the law, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity,
solidarity, well-being and prosperity of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that I will strive to
preserve the Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy contained in
the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that I will exercise the authority vested
in me as Governor so as not to impede or prejudice the authority lawfully vested in the
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and so as not to endanger the continuance of
Federal Government in Nigeria; that I will not allow my personal interest to influence my
official conduct or my official decisions; that I will to the to the best of my ability preserve,
protect and defend the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that I will abide by
the Code of Conduct contained in the Fifty Schedule to the Constitution of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria; that in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people,
according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will; that I will not directly or
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my
consideration or shall become known to me as Governor of ......... State, except as may be
required for the due discharge of my duties as Governor; and that I will devote myself to
the service and well-being of the people of Nigeria.
So help me God.
Oath of Office of Vice-President, Deputy Governor, Minister, Commissioner or
Special Adviser
I, .......... do solemnly swear/affirm that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the
Federal Republic of Nigeria; that as Vice-President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria/Deputy
Governor of ....... State/Minister of the Government of the Federation/Commissioner of the
Government ........ State/Special Adviser to ........, I will discharge my duties to the best of
my ability, faithfully and in accordance with the Constitution of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria and the law, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, wellbeing and prosperity of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that I will strive to preserve the
Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy contained in the Constitution
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that I will not allow my personal interest to influence my
official conduct or my official decisions, that I will to the best of my ability preserve, protect
and defend the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that I will abide by the Code
of Conduct contained in the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria; that in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law,
without fear or favour, affection or ill-will; that I will not directly or indirectly communicate
or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall
become known to me as Vice-President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria/Deputy Governor
of ..... State/Minister of the Government of the Federation/Commissioner of ......
State/Special Adviser to ......... except as may be required for the due discharge of my
duties as Vice President/Deputy Governor of ....... State/Minister/Commissioner/Special
Adviser.
So help me God.
Oath of a Member of the National Assembly or of a House of Assembly
I, ..... do solemnly swear/affirm that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Federal
Republic of Nigeria; that as a Member of the Senate/House of Representatives/ ..... House
of Assembly, I will perform my functions honestly to the best of my ability, faithfully and in
accordance with the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and the law, and the

rules of the Senate/House of Representatives/ ...... House of Assembly and always in the
interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria; that I will strive to preserve the Fundamental Objectives and Directive
Principles of State Policy contained in the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria;
and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria; and that I will abide by the Code of Conduct contained in the Fifth Schedule of the
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
So help me God.
Judicial Oath
I, ...... do solemnly swear/affirm that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the
Federal Republic of Nigeria; that as Chief Justice of Nigeria/Justice of the Supreme
Court/President/Justice of the Court of Appeal/Chief Judge/Judge of the Federal High
Corut/Chief Judge/Judge of the High Court of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja/Chief
Judge of ...... State/Judge of the High Court of ...... State/Grand Kadi/Kadi of the Sharia
Court of Appeal of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja/ Grand Kadi/Kadi of the Sharia Court
of Appeal of .... State/President/Judge of the Customary Court of Appeal of the Federal
Capital Territory, Abuja/President/Judge of the Customary Court of Appeal of ......... State. I
will discharge my duties, and perform my functions honestly, to the best of my ability and
faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and the law,
that I will abide by the Code of Conduct contained in the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria; that I will not allow my personal interest to influence my
official conduct or my official decisions; that I will preserve, protect and defend the
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
So help me God

Back to Page One

FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS (ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE) RULES S.I 1 OF 1979
under Chapter IV of the Constitution
[1st January, 1980]
[Commencement.]
REVOKED BY FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS (ENFORCEMENT RULES 2008
ORDER 1
1. (1) These Rules may be cited as the Fundamental Rights (Enforcement Procedure) Rules.
(2) In these Rules—
“application” includes an application for the leave of the court;
“fundamental right” means any of the fundamental rights provided for in Chapter IV of the
Constitution;
[Cap. C23.]
“Court” means the Federal High Court or the High Court of a State;
“Judge” means a Judge of the Court;
“legal representative” means a person admitted to practice in the Supreme Court of Nigeria
who has been retained by or assigned to a party to represent him in the proceedings before
the Court;
“originating summons” means every summons other than a summons in a pending cause or
matter;
“prison superintendent” means the person in charge of the prison or any other place in
which the complainant is restrained or confined;
“registrar” means the registrar of the Court hearing the application or of any court to which
an order is directed;
“Rules” means these Rules or any amendment thereto and includes the Forms appended to

these Rules;
“State” means one of the component parts of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Application for leave
2. (1) Any person who alleges that any of the Fundamental Rights provided for in the
Constitution and to which he is entitled, has been, is being, or is likely to be infringed may
apply to the Court in the State where the infringement occurs or is likely to occur, for
redress.
(2) No application for an order enforcing or securing the enforcement within that State of
any such rights shall be made unless leave therefor has been granted in accordance with
this rule.
(3) An application for such leave must be made ex parte to the appropriate Court and must
be supported by a statement setting out the name and description of the applicant, the
relief sought, and the grounds on which it is sought, and by an affidavit verifying the facts
relied on.
(4) The applicant must file, in the appropriate Court, the application for leave not later than
the day preceding the date of hearing and must at the same time lodge in the said Court
enough copies of the statement and affidavit for service on any other party or parties as the
Court may order.
(5) The Court or Judge may, in granting leave, impose such terms as to giving security for
costs as it or he thinks fit.
(6) The granting of leave under this rule, if the Court or Judge so directs, shall operate as a
stay of all actions or matters relating to, or connected with, the complaint until the
determination of the application or until the Court or Judge otherwise orders.
Time for applying for leave
3. (1) Leave shall not be granted to apply for an order under these Rules unless the
application is made within twelve months from the date of the happening of the event,
matter, or act complained of, or such other period as may be prescribed by any enactment
or, except where a period is so prescribed, the delay is accounted for to the satisfaction of
the Court or Judge to whom the application for leave is made.
(2) Where the event, matter, or act complained of arose out of a proceeding which is
subject to appeal and a time is limited by law for bringing of the appeal, the Court or Judge
may adjourn the application for leave until the appeal is determined or the time for
appealing has expired.
ORDER 2
1. (1) When leave has been granted to apply for the order being asked for, the application
for such order must be made by notice of motion or by originating summons to the
appropriate Court, and unless the Court or Judge granting leave has otherwise directed,
there must be at least eight clear days between the service of the motion or summons and
the day named therein for the hearing. Form No. 1 or 2 in the Appendix may be used as
appropriate.
(2) The motion or summons must be entered for hearing within fourteen days after such
leave has been granted.
(3) The motion or summons must be served on all persons directly affected, and where it
relates to proceedings in or before a court, and the object is either to compel the Court or
an officer thereof to do any act in relation to the proceedings or to quash them or any order
made therein the motion or summons must be served on the registrar of the Court, the
other parties to the proceedings and, where any objection to the conduct of the Judge is
made, on the Judge.
(4) An affidavit giving the names and addresses of, and the place and date of service on all
persons who have been served with the motion or summons must be filed before the motion
or summons is listed for hearing, and, if any person who ought to have been served under
paragraph (3) of this rule has not been served, the affidavit must state the fact and the
reason why service has not been effected, and the said affidavit shall be before the Court or

Judge on the hearing of the motion or summons.
(5) If on the hearing of the motion or summons the Court or Judge is of the opinion that
any person who ought to have been served with the motion or summons has not been
served, whether or not he is a person who ought to have been served under paragraph (3),
the Court or Judge may adjourn the hearing on such terms, if any, as it or he may direct in
order that the motion or summons may be served on that person.
Statements and affidavits
2. (1) Copies of the statement in support of the application for leave under Order 1 rule 2
(3) must be served with the notice of motion or summons under rule 1 (3) of Order 2 and,
subject to paragraph (2) of this rule, no grounds shall be relied upon or any relief sought at
the hearing of the motion or summons except the grounds and relief set out in the said
statement.
(2) The Court or Judge may, on the hearing of the motion or summons, allow the said
statement to be amended and may allow further affidavits to be used if they deal with new
matters arising out of any affidavit of any other party to the application, and where the
applicant intends to ask to be allowed to amend his statement or use further affidavits he
must give notice of his intention and of any proposed amendment of his statement to every
other party, and must supply to every such party, copies of such further affidavits.
(3) Every party to the application must supply to any other party copies of the affidavit
which he proposes to use at the hearing.
Several applications relating to the same infringement
3. Where several applications relating to the infringement of a particular fundamental right
are pending against several persons in respect of the same matter, and on the same
grounds, the applications may be consolidated by order of the Court or Judge hearing the
applications.
ORDER 3
Application to quash any proceedings
1. (1) In the case of an application for an order to remove any proceedings for the purpose
of their being quashed, the applicant may not question the validity of any order, warrant,
commitment, conviction, inquisition or record unless before the hearing of the motion or
summons he has served a certified copy thereof together with a copy of the application on
the Attorney-General of the Federation or of the State in which the application is being
heard, as the case may be, or accounts for his failure to do so to the satisfaction of the
Court or Judge hearing the motion or summons.
(2) Where an order to remove any proceedings for the purpose of their being quashed is
made, in any such case, the order shall direct that the proceedings shall be quashed
forthwith on their removal into the Court which heard the application.
ORDER 4
Application for production and release of person restrained
1. (1) In an application where the applicant complains of wrongful or unlawful detention, the
Court or Judge to whom the application is made ex parte may make an order forthwith for
his release from such detention, or may—
(a) direct that an originating summons as in the Form 2 in the Appendix be issued or that
an application therefore be made by notice of motion, as in the Form 3; or
(b) adjourn the ex parte application so that notice thereof may be given to the person
against whom the order for the release of the applicant is sought.
(2) The summons or notice of motion must be served on the person against whom the order
for the release of the applicant is sought and on such other persons as the Court or Judge
may direct, and, unless the Court or Judge otherwise directs, there must be at least five
clear days between the service of the summons or motion and the date named therein for
the hearing of the application.
(3) Every party to an application under paragraph (1) of this rule must supply to every
other party copies of the affidavits which he proposes to use at the hearing of the

application.
2. Without prejudice to rule 1 (1), the Court or Judge hearing an application where the
applicant complains of wrongful or unlawful detention may, in its or his discretion, order
that the person restrained be produced in court, and such order shall be a sufficient warrant
to any Superintendent of a prison, police officer in charge of a police station, police officer
or Constable in charge of the complainant, or any other person responsible for his
detention, for the production in court of the person under restraint.
3. Where an order is made for the production of a person restrained, the Court or Judge by
whom the order is made shall give directions as to the Court or Judge before whom, and the
date on which, the order is returnable.
4. (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3) of this rule, an order for the production of the
person restrained must be `served personally on the person to whom it is directed.
(2) If it is not possible to serve such an order personally, or if it is directed to a police
officer, or a prison superintendent or other public official, it must be served by leaving it
with any other person or official working in the office of the police officer, or the prison or
office of the superintendent or the office of the public official to whom the order is directed.
(3) If the order is made against more than one person, the order must be served in manner
provided by the rule on the person first named in the order and copies must be served on
each of the other persons in the same manner.
(4) There must be served with the order (in the Form 4 in the Appendix) for the production
of the person restrained a notice (in the Form 5 in the Appendix) stating the Court or Judge
before whom, and the date on which the person restrained is to be brought.
Return to the Order for release
5. (1) The return to an order for the release of a person restrained must be endorsed on or
annexed to the order and must state all the causes or justifications of the detainer of the
person restrained.
(2) The return may be amended, or another return substituted therefor, by leave of the
Court or Judge before whom the order is returnable.
Proceedings at hearing of motion or summons after order has been returned
6. When a return to the order has been made, the return shall first be read in open court
and an oral application then made for discharging or remanding the person restrained or
amending or quashing the return, and, where that person is brought up in court in
accordance with the order, his legal representative shall be heard first, then the legal
representative for the State or for any other official or person restraining him. The legal
representative for the person restrained will then be heard in reply.
7. An order for the release of a person restrained shall be made in clear and simple terms
having regard to all the circumstances.
ORDER 5
Right of any other person or body to be heard
Any person or body who desires to be heard in respect of any application, motion, or
summons, under these Rules, and appears to the Court or Judge to be a proper person or
body to be heard, shall be heard notwithstanding that he or it has not been served with the
copy of the application, motion, or summons.
ORDER 6
Orders which the court can make, and effect of disobedience
1. (1) At the hearing of any application, motion, or summons under these Rules, the Court
or Judge concerned may make such orders, issue such writs, and give such directions as it
or he may consider just or appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights provided for in the Constitution to which the
complainant may be entitled.
(2) In default of obedience of any order made by the Court or Judge under these Rules,
proceedings for the committal of the party disobeying such an order will be taken. An order
of Committal is in the Form 6 of the Appendix.

APPENDIX

FORM No. 1

NOTICE OF MOTION FOR AN ORDER ENFORCING A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT
[ORDER 2 RULE 1 (1)]

In the Federal High Court/High Court of ......................................................... State.

In the matter of an application by .......................................................................... for

an order for the enforcement of a Fundamental Right

and

In the matter of .........................................................................................Applicant

Take notice that pursuance to the leave of the Federal High Court
at......................................)

High Court of ..........................State (or Honourable
Justice......................................................)

given on the..........................day of ...........................19.............., the
...................................

High Court will be moved on the................day of.................19............, or so soon
thereafter as counsel can be heard on behalf of
.............................................................................................

(for an order
that....................................................................................................................)

.......................................................................................................................... (in
terms of the relief sought in the statement accompanying the affidavit in support of the
application for leave to apply for the order) on the grounds set out in the copy statement
served herewith used on the application for leave to apply for such order.

And take notice that on the hearing of this motion the said
..................................................

will use the affidavit of
.................................................................................................and the exhibits
therein referred to.

(And also take notice that
the..................................................................................................

High Court (or the Honourable
Justice........................................................................................)

by order dated.............................................................................. directed that all
proceedings in (or on) the said.......................................................................... be
stayed until after the hearing of this motion or further order).

DATED the.......................... day of ...................... 19.................

(Signed)

Applicant or his Legal
Representative

To
Respondent or his Legal Representative.

Note:- Delete the High Court which is not applicable.

FORM NO. 2
ORIGINATING SUMMONS

[Order 2 rule 1 (1), and Order 4 rule 1 (1)]

In the Federal High Court
at................................................................................................./ High

Court of.......................................................State......................................... Division

Suit No. ..........................................................

(in the matter
of..............................................................................................................)
Between A.B.
..................................................................................................................Plaintiff

C.D.
..........................................................................................................................
Defendant

To C.D. of................................................................................... in
the.................................of

Let the defendant, within 14 days (or if the summons is to be served out of the jurisdiction,
insert here the time for appearance fixed by the order giving leave to issue the summons
and serve it out of the jurisdiction) after service of this summons on him, inclusive of the
day of service, cause an appearance to be entered to this summons, which is issued on the
application of the plaintiff...............................of.......................

By this summons the plaintiff claims against the defendant.........................................(or
seeks the determination of the Court of the following questions,
namely,.............................or as may be)

If the defendant does not enter an appearance, such judgment may be given or order made
against or in relation to him as the Court may think just and expedient.

Dated the................. day of ...................................... 19...........................

Note: This summons may not be served later than twelve calendar months beginning from
the above date unless renewed by order of the Court.

This summons was taken out by
.........................................................................................................

of
................................................................................................................................
.......................

the solicitor for the plaintiff whose address is
.......................................................................................

................................................................................................................................
.................................

................................................................................................................................
.......... (or where the

plaintiff sues in person this summons was taken out by the said plaintiff who resides at

................................................................................................................................
................................

................................................................................................................................
............................

DIRECTIONS FOR ENTERING APPEARANCE

The defendant may enter an appearance in person or by a solicitor by handling in the
appropriate forms, duly completed, at the Federal High Court at
.....................................................
or the High Court of
..................................................................................................................... State

sitting at
................................................................................................................................
...................
(Delete Court which is not applicable).

JUDGE

For Service on
...........................................................
Defendant or Solicitor acting for him.

FORM NO. 3

NOTICE OF MOTION FOR AN ORDER FOR THE PRODUCTION OF PERSON DETAINED
(Order 4 rule 1 (1))

In the Federal High Court at
......................................................................................................./ the

High Court of
....................................................................................................................... State.

Suit No. .......................................

In the matter of A.B.

and

In the matter of an application for the release of person detained.

Take notice that pursuant to the direction of the Honourable Justice
.................................................

......................... of the Federal High Court at
.................................................................................../or

of the High Court of
........................................................................................................... State the

High Court will be moved on the ........................ day of ........................ 19
...................................., or so soon thereafter as counsel can be heard on behalf of
....................................................................

for an order directed to ................................................................................... to have
the body of
the said .............................................................................................................
before the High Court

at ............................................................ at such time as the Court or judge may direct
upon the

grounds set out in the affidavits of the said
...........................................................................

................................................. and ................................................................. and
the exhibits therein

respectively referred to used on the application to the Honourable Justice
...........................................

(or the High Court) for such order, copies of which affidavits and exhibits are served
herewith.

And take notice that on the hearing of this motion the said
.................................................will
use the affidavits of himself and the
said....................................................................................
.................................................................... and the exhibits therein referred to.

DATED the ........................................ day of ................................ 19
................................

Signed

Applicant of his Legal Representative

Note:- Delete the High Court which is not applicable.

To
................................................
The officer on person who has
custody of person detained.

FORM NO. 4
ORDER FOR PRODUCTION OF PERSON DETAINED

[Order 4 rule 4 (4)]

Suit No. .........................

In the matter of the Enforcement of a Fundamental Right.
In the matter of the detention of
.......................................................................................

................................................................................................................................
............ Applicant

To the Superintendent of
................................................................................................ prison or

other person having custody of ...............................................................
at...........................................

We command you that you produce in the Federal High Court at
.................................................
................................/or in the High Court of .................................................... State
at ............................................................................................. on the day and at the
time specified
in the notice served with this order the body of
...........................................................................
being taken and detained under your custody as is said, together with the day and cause of
his being taken and detained, by whatsoever name he may be called therein, that Our Court
(or judge) may then and there examine and determine whether such cause is legal, and
have you there then this order.

Witness this .............................................. day of ...................................... 19
....................

...............................................
Judge

Note:- Delete High Court which is not applicable.

To

..............................................................................
the officer or person against whom order is sought.

FORM NO. 5

NOTICE TO BE SERVED WITH THE ORDER FOR
THE PRODUCTION OF PERSON DETAINED

[ORDER 4 rule 4 (4)]

Suit No. ............

In the Federal High Court at ............................................................................./ or the
High Court of

........................................................................ State at
..........................................................................

In the matter of the application of
...............................................................................................
(If in a cause already begun, here insert the title, not otherwise).

Whereas this Court (or the Honourable Justice
................................................................

has made an order directed ..................................................... (or other person having
the custody of ............................... if so) commanding him to have the body of
........................................ before the said Court at
...........................................................................on the day and at the time specified in
the order together with the day and cause of his being taken and detained.

Take notice that you are required by the said Order to have the body of the said
..........................

before this Court (or before the judge aforesaid) on the .................................. day of
............................... 19 ....................... at .................................... o'clock and make a
return to the said Order. In default thereof the said Court will then, or so soon thereafter as
counsel can be heard, be moved to commit you to prison for your contempt in not obeying
the said Order (or if in vacation application will then be made to one of the judges of the
said Court for a warrant for your arrest in order that you may be held to answer for your
contempt in not obeying the said writ).

DATED the ........................ day of .............................................. 19
................................

(Signed)

Applicant or his Legal Representative

Note:- Delete High Court which is not applicable.

FORM NO. 6

ORDER OF COMMITTAL
[Order 6 Rule 1 (2)]

(Heading as in Action)

Suit No. ............

Upon motion this day made unto this Court by counsel for the plaintiff and upon reading (an
affidavit of ............................................. filed the ....................... day of .....................
19 .................. of service on the defendant ............................................. of a copy of
the order of the Court dated the ............... day of ........................................
19............................, and notice of this motion):

And it appearing to the satisfaction of the Court that the defendant
.................................... has been guilty of contempt of court in (state the contempt):

It is ordered that for his said contempt the defendant do stand committed to Prison to be
there imprisoned (until further order).

(It is further ordered that this order shall not be executed if the defendant ............complies
with the following terms, namely
...............................................................................................

DATED the ......................... day of .................................... 19.............................

----------------------------------Judge

MADE this day of December, 1979.

A. FATAYI-WILLIAMS,
Chief Justice of Nigeria
CHILD RIGHT (TRANSFER OF CERTAIN STATUTORY FUNCTIONS ) ORDER S.I.No. 15 of 2005

Under section 2
Commencement date : 13th September, 2005
Exercise of the powers
In exercise of the powers conferred don me by section 315(2) of the Constitution of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 and section 2 (1) (b) of the Minister’s Statutory Powers
and Duties (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act Cap. 228 Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 1990
and all other powers enabling me in that behalf I, Olusegun Obasanjo President of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria hereby make the following order:
Transfer of Certain Statutory Function
The functions conferred on the Minister charged with the responsibility for matters relating
to children under the Child’s Right Act 2003 with respect to the powers to make Regulations
is hereby transferred to the Minister Federal Capital Territory.
The Minister Federal Capital Territory shall exercise the functions herein transferred only in
respect of making Regulations to ensure the effective implementation of the provisions of
the Child’s Rights Acts as it affects the Federal Capital Territory.
Short Title
The order may be cited as the Child Rights (Transfer of Certain Statutory Functions) order.
MADE AT ABUJA this 7TH DAY of SEPTEMBER, 2005.
Signed
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO GCFR
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
FEDERAL CAPITAL TERRITORY (ESTABLISHMENT OF FUNCTIONARIES AND DEPARTMENTS)
AND MINISTRY OF THE FEDERAL CAPITAL TERRITORY (DISSOLUTION) ORDER NO. 1,2004
S.I.4 of 2005
In exercise of the powers conferred on me by Section 299 and 302 f the constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999, and sections 14 and 18(b) of the Federal Capital Territory
Act Cap F6 Laws of Nigeria 2004, and all other powers enabling me in the at behalf, and all
other powers enabling me in that behalf, and with the intention to ensure the prompt,
effective and efficient administration of, and delivery of services to the residents in the
Federal Capital Territory, I Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
hereby make the following Order.
1. With the exception of the offences created in the schedule thereto, this order shall be
deemed to have come into effect from Tuesday, 1st June, 2004.

2. This order may be cited as the Federal Capital Territory (Establishment of Functionaries
and Department) and Ministry of the Federal Capital Territory (Dissolution) order No. 1,
2004.
3. The administrative and bureaucratic structure established and referred to as the Ministry
of the Federal Capital Territory is hereby abolished with effect from 31st December 2004.
4. Consequently, and subject to paragraph 5 below, with effect from the commencement of
this Order:
(a) Steps shall immediately be taken to wind up a nd cease altogether the activities carried
on by the various Departments and sub-units of the Ministry (howsoever called);
(b) All officers of the Civil Service of the Federal posted or secnded t the Ministry or to the
FCDA shall, on a date t be determined by the Minister, be posted to the Office of the Head
of Service of the Federal or de-seconded to their previous postings without further
assurance or Order; and
(c) The duties, functions, responsibilities, powers, rights, privileges, assets and liabilities
previously conferred on the Ministry are hereby transferred to the FCDA and other agencies
created under these Regulations without further assurance order
5. The Minister may, in his absolute discretion, determine that certain individual members of
the Civil Service f the Federation may remain seconded to the FCDA ; in which case such
person shall be deemed t continue their service in the FCDA without any break in service.
6. With effect from the commencement of this order, and no later tan 31st March, 2005 the
permanent secretary of the Ministry (“The permanent Secretary of the Ministry (“the
permanent Secretary”) shall, in addition to such other functions as the Minister may assign
to him, perform the following specific duties.
(a) Advise the Minister on service, establishment, staff welfare, deployment and pension
matters relating to the winding-up of the Ministry ; and
(b) Advise the Minister on the modalities for the proper and effective transfer and disposal
of all assets and liabilities of the Ministry pursuant to this winding-up and dissolution as
ordered therein.
7. Immediately upon the completion of the tasks in paragraph 6 above as certified by the
Minister, the Permanent Secretary shall also be transferred t the Office of the Head of
Service of the Federation.
8. There shall be established for the Federal Capital Territory, the Office of the Chief of Staff
t the Minister (“the Chief of Staff”).
9. The Chief of Staff shall be appointed by the Minister, and shall enjoy the conditions of
service applicable to a Special Assistant in the Office of the President of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria.

10. The Chief of Staff shall, in addition to such other functions, powers responsibilities as
may be assigned by the Minister, perform the functions that a secretary to the Government
of a State Customarily performs in relation t that State
11. The Chief of Staff shall, in addition to such other functions as the Minister may assign to
hi, perform the following duties.
(a) Serve as Secretary to all Committees, Councils and other executive bodies established
for collective decision-making in the Territory chaired by the Minister;
(b) Political, economical and administrative issues affecting the Territory as may be
assigned by the Minister;
(c) Provide staff resources for administrative issues affecting the Territory as may be
assigned by the Minister.
(c) Provide staff resources for administrative tribunals and commissions of enquiry
established in relation t the Territory and process the reports thereof for formal release t the
general public ;
(d) Coordinate protocol, security and public safety matters for the Territory;
(e) Superintend over matters of the exercise of the prerogative of mercy by the Minister and
petitions and appeals to the Minister;
(f) Liaison with Secretaries to the various State and Federal Governments:
(g)Oversee conditions of service and accommodation (where necessary) of political office
holders in the Territory, as may be assigned to him by the Minister: and
(h) Coordinate appointments to parastatals and statutory bodies of the Territory
(i) Management f all administrative departments established in the Office of the Minister,
excluding the Secretariats and Agencies established herein below.
12. (1) There shall be established in the Federal Capital Territory the following Executive
Secretaries, which shall function like Ministers in States of the Federation, namely:
(a) Agriculture and Rural Development;
(b) Education;
(c) Health and Human Services;
(d) Social Development;
(e) Transportation.
(2) In addition to 12 (1) above and other Agencies already existing before the
commencement of this Order, there shall also be established in the Federal Capital Territory

the following Agencies, which shall function as specialized bureaus and parastatals, similar t
those in the States of the Federation:
(a) The Satellite Towns Development Agency ;
(b) The Abuja Geographic information systems Agency;
(c) The Abuja Metropolitan Management Agency; and
(d) The Abuja Tourism Development Agency.
(3) Each secretariat and Agency shall respectively be comprised of such number of subunits, respectively called ‘Divisions’, as the Minister may, from time to time determine. The
Departments and Divisions shall have assigned to them such functions, powers and
responsibilities as the Minister may, in his discretion, determine in writing.
(4) Effective authority in the Territory, conferred by the Constitution of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria 1999, is hereby delegated t the Minister, who shall be the Chief Officer f the
Territory, accountable to the President. The composition and functions of each secretariat
established in subsection (1) of this section are as contained in First, Second, Third, Fourth
and Fifth schedules to these Regulation, respectively.
(5) In relation to the Secretariats and Agencies herein established, and such others as may
presently exist r as may be e established from time t time, the Minister shall have the power
to:
(a) Appoint with the approval f the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria such fit and
proper person, by whatever title know, to function as Chief Executives of such secretariat or
Agency, to whom the Minister may delegate his executive and accunting powers and duties
as he may deem fit:
(b) Determine the Personnel requirements of the Secretariat and Agencies and assign
required staff of FCDA and other agencies thereto ;
(c) Review, approve and consolidate into the budget of the FCT the annual estimate of
revenue and expenditure proposed by each secretariat or Agency for the coming fiscal year;
(d) Review and approve the programme of activity proposed by each Secretariat or Agency
for the coming fiscal year;
(e) Authorize the opening and operation of bank accounts for each Secretariat or Agency, to
be operated in a manner that ensures transparency, accountability and due process ;
*Delegate as much of his powers as he deems fit to the said Chief Executive of the
Secretariat and Agencies to do all such things as necessary to ensure the due and prompt
execution of their assigned functions, powers and responsibilities.
(6) The Chief Executive of a Secretariat of Agency shall hold office for the period stated in
his or her letter of appointment.

(7) The Chief Executive shall also be the accounting officer of the Secretariat or Agency to
the extent delegated by the Minister and shall in addition thereto have responsibility for :
(a) Developing and proposing policy, plans and programmes pertaining to the Secretariat or
Agency ; and
(b) Overseeing the competent and prompt execution of all policies, plans and programmes
approved for the Secretariat or Agency.
(8) Each Secretariat or Agency may, with the approval of the Minister, maintain such bank
account as it deems necessary, consisting of :
(a) Such monies as may from time to time be provided to it by the Federal Government of
Nigeria;
(b) Such monies as may be received by it in the course of its operations or in relation to
the exercise of its powers and responsibilities, other than those t be paid into the
Centralized Revenue Fund of the FCT.
13. Each Secretariat shall submit t the Minister on or before 31st March in each year a
Report of its activities for the period 1st January to 31st December of the preceding year,
which shall include a copy of this un-audited financial statements for the said period, for
review and audit by the Minister or such other person as authorized by him.
14. The Minister may, with the approval of the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
issue in writing such directives, modifying or amending this Order, as he may deem
necessary in furtherance of the efficient execution of the intention expressed in the
preamble hereto
15. In these Regulations:
‘Act’ means the Federal Capital Territory Act, Cap F6 LFN, 2004 or order re-enactment
‘Agriculture and Rural Development’ includes any agricultural and rural development
activity aimed a the development and processing of natural resources and raw materials
products derived from agricultural and livestock produce, the maintenance of the forest
resources of the Territory in line with extant National Policy and all policy, planning,
regulation and other related activity involved in any way with the development and /or
promotion of these sectors;
‘Education’ includes overseeing all educational facilities, including public and private
schools, with the aim or providing a high standard of qualitative education within the
Territory and all charitable, social or economic and business activity that encourages all
aspects of the human development of children, youth and adults of the Territory;
‘FCDA’ means the Federal Capital Development Authority
‘FCT ‘ means the Federal Capital Territory as defined in s 299 –304 of the Constitution of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria.

‘Health Services ‘ includes overseeing the range of activities aimed at providing preventive,
protective, promotive, curative and rehabilitative care to ensure a state of physical and
mental well-being of an individual or community ;
‘Metropolitan Management ‘ includes responsibility for the efficient running the operation of
municipal services within the City of Abuja;
“Minister ‘ means the Minister delegated by the President, under powers conferred by
Section 302 of Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999, with executive
responsibility for the Territory ;
‘Ministry’ means the Ministry of the Federal Capital Territory ;
‘Satellite Towns Development ‘ includes the responsibility for the efficient urban planning
and development and effective operation and management of municipal services for the
various towns within the Territory;
‘Satellite Towns Development’ includes the responsibility for the efficient urban planning
and development and effective operation and management of municipal services for the
various towns within the Territory ;
‘Social Services and Development’ includes the provision of a nurturing environment for
women and children in the Territory, overseeing critical social enablers such as the
provision of micro finance for vulnerable and disadvantage groups, the promotion of arts
and culture, the supervision of organized sporting activity within the Territory, and the
regulation of these activities;
‘Territory’ means the Federal Capital Territory and includes the 6 (six) Area Councils in
existence for the time being and the geographic expanse of land that they traverse;
tourism means the responsibility for formulating and implementing policies for enhancing
and developing the potentials of tourism. Regulating the activities of tourism operators
within the Territory and promoting the orderly growth and development of sustainable
tourism for the social and economic development of the Territory;
‘Transportation ‘ includes all those activities aimed at ensuring the rapid and efficient
carriage of goods and passengers by automotive means, whether by rail, road, water a and
air, the development of infrastructure for the purposes of establishing an efficient
transportation system within the Territory, and the regulation of the various means of such
carriage in use at any time within the Territory.
Made at Abuja this 24th day of December, 2004
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO, GCFR
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
FIRST SCHEDULE –Regulation 12 (1) (a)
THE AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT SECRETARIAT

Composition
1. (1) The Secretariat shall comprise of a Secretary who shall be appointed by the
President, on the recommendation of the Minister, of the status of Special Assistant, and
who shall be the Chief Executive of the Secretariat, in charge f its day to day operations;
(2) The Management Committee of the Secretariat shall consist of the following members,
to be appointed by the Minister ;
(a) the secretary who is the chairman;
(b) a representative of the Minister not below GL.12 who shall be the Head of
Finance and Administration;
(c) all Directors, Heads of Departments and Units within the Secretariat, and
(d) Secretary and Legal Adviser who shall be a legal practitioner with at least not
less than 7 (seven) years post call experience who shall be assigned such duties
as the Secretary may determine.
Functions
2. The functions of the Secretariat shall include to develop the rural and agricultural sector
without the Territory as well as to maintain its forests in line with the National policy, and to
perform such other functions that are incidental to the furtherance to these objectives.
Registration of Agricultural Establishments
3. (1) The secretariat may, upon such terms and conditions as it may consider appropriate,
register co-operative societies and farmer support groups and other agricultural and agroallied establishments in the Territory;
(2) The establishments affected by the provision of sub-section (1) are mainly beneficiaries
of government support initiatives, implementing partners of government programmes and
projects, and other establishments as the secretariat may from time to time determine;
(3) The secretariat shall keep record such registrations, pursuant to the provisions of subsection (1).
De-listing of Establishments
4. (1) There is, hereby, established a body to be known as the Regulatory Appeals
Committee herein referred to as ‘the Committee’
(2) The members of the Committee shall be 5 (five) who shall be appointed as determined
by the Minister; and
(3) A member employee of the Secretariat shall not be appointed a member of the
Committee.

5. (1) Where, in the opinion of the secretariat, the registered establishment pursuant to
sub-section (1) of section 1 is in default of any of the conditions spelt ut therein, and has
not rectified the default after a demand so to do has been made by the Regulations and
Schedule, de-list the relevant establishment;
(2) A de-listed establishment, pursuant to sub-section (1) may, within three months or such
de-listing apply in writing to the Appeals committee established pursuant to section 2 to
review the decision of the Secretariat.
Power of the Committee
6. (1) The Committee shall receive applications from aggrieved parties with a view to
reviewing cases of de-listing carried out by the secretariat;
(2) The Committee may, after hearing both parties and giving them an opportunity to make
representations before it, either in writing or otherwise, proceed to confirm or reverse the
decision or the Secretariat or make such Order or orders as it may consider proper in any
given circumstance;
(3) In any proceeding before the Committee, an agreed or responding party may be
represented by a legal practitioner;
(4) The decision of the Committee is subject to appeal t the Minister whose division thereon
shall be final, but without prejudice to the right of the aggrieved party to seek legal redress.
Powers of Inspection
7. (1) The Secretariat may, upon such terms and conditions which it deems fit, appoint
person who shall be known as Inspectors,
(a) enter, inspect and examine at any time of the day premises that are ring used as
agricultural establishments and request the proprietor or owner t furnish him in such
from as he may direct, with any information on any matter specified in accordance with
the relevant Regulations.
(b) notice, require the proprietor, owner of any premises that is being used as an
agricultural establishment, to furnish him in such form as he may direct, with any
information on any matter specified by him
(c) Make such examination and enquiry as may be necessary, to ascertain whether the
provisions of the relevant Regulation pursuant thereto, are being complied with by the
concerned establishment or owner of any agricultural establishment
(d) An Inspector may enlist ad assistance of a police officer if he apprehends serious
obtrusion in the execution of his duties under this Section
(2) Whoever, being legally bound to render or furnish assistance to any inspector in the
execution of his duty intentionally, omits to give such assistance shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or a fine of N50,000 (fifty
thousand naira only) or both

offences and Penalties
8 (1) Any person who willfully operates or runs agricultural establishments or institutions
within the Territory without due registration by the Secretariat in accordance with the
provision sin Schedule 1 (one) of these Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable
to a fine f N200,000.00 (two hundred thousand naira only) or three months imprisonment
or both.
(2) Any person who refuses to abate the default of any condition or term of registration in
accordance with the provisions in Schedule 1 (one), after the Secretariat had duly
requested him to do so shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of N10,000.00 (ten
thousand naira only) daily for a period not exceeding two weeks after which the
establishment shall be sealed until such default is rectified and the accumulated fine paid.
(3) Any person who willfully delays an inspector in the exercise f the power conferred on
him under the schedule, or fails to comply with his requisition or produce any document or
furnish any information he is required to produce, or withholds any information as to who
the proprietor of any premises of an agricultural establishment is, or refuses to allow entry
by a duly authorized inspector, shall be deemed to have obstructed an officer in the
execution f his duties.
(4) Any person who obstructs an inspector in the execution of his duties under these
Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of N50,000.00 (fifty thousand
naira only) or one month’s imprisonment or both.
SECOND SCHEDULE – Regulation 12 (1) (b)
THE EDUCATION SECRETARIAT
Composition
1. (1) The Secretariat shall comprise of a Secretary who shall be appointed by the
President, on the recommendation of the Minister, of the status of Special Assistant, and
who shall be the Chief Executive of the Secretariat, in charge of its day to day operations;
(2) The Management Committee of the Secretarial shall consist of the following members, t
be appoint by the Minister;
(a) the Secretary which is the chairman
(b) a representative of the Minister not below GL 12 who shall be the Head of
Finance and Administration;
(c) all Directors, Head of Departments and Units within the Secretariat and not less
than 7(seven) years post call experience who shall be assigned such duties as the
secretary may determine
2. The functions of the Secretariat shall include the regulatory of all educational facilities,
including public and private schools, with the aims of providing a high standard of
qualitative education within the Territory, the establishment of educational institutions, and
to perform such other functions that are incidental to the achievement of these objectives.

Registration and Accreditation of Education Institutions
3. (1) The Secretariat may upon such terms and conditions as it may consider appropriate
register under license all education providers in the Territory;
(2) The Institutions affected by the provisions of sub-section (1) are pre-primary, primary,
secondary, commercial, and tertiary, and other schools as the secretariat may from time to
time determine;
(3) The Secretariat shall keep the Register of accreditation licenses issued pursuant to the
provisions of sub-section (1)
4. (1) where in the opinion of the Secretariat the holder of a registration license issued
pursuant to sub-section (1) of section 1 is in default of any of the conditions spelt out
therein and has not rectified the default after a demand so t do has been made by the
Secretariat, it may in addition to any penalty that may be provided under these Regulations
and Schedule revoke the license and make a public announce to warn the public
accordingly;
(2) An accredited Institution whose license is revoked pursuant to sub-section (1) may
within three months of such revocation apply in writing t the Minister of the Secretariat to
review the decision.
Power of Inspection
5. (1) The Secretariat may upon such terms and conditions which it deems fit appoint
persons who shall be known as Inspectors with powers to :
(a) enter, inspect and examine at any time of the day premises that are being used as
educational establishments and request the proprietor or the head of furnish them in such
form as they may direct with any information on any matter specified in accordance with
the accreditation license issued;
(b) by Notice require the proprietor or head of any premises that is being used as an
educational institution t furnish him in such form as he may direct with any information on
any matter specified by him in the Notice
(c) make such examination and enquiry as may be necessary to ascertain whether the
provisions of this Act or any regulation made or license issued pursuant thereto are being
complied with in the establishment and management of the Institution;
(2)An Inspector may enlist the assistance of a police officer if he apprehends serious
obstruction in the execution f his duties under this Section;
(3) Whoever being legally bound to render or furnish assistance to any Inspector in
the execution of his duty intentionally, omits to give such assistance may have his
Institution closed down r be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 3
(three ) months or a fine fN100,000 (one hundred thousand naira) or both ;

(4) Any educational Institution closed down may not be allowed to open again for the
remaining part of the academic year or admit fresh students to tart new programme in the
next academic year
offences and Penalties
8 (1) Any person who willfully operates or runs Educational institutions within the Territory
without due registration by the Secretariat in accordance with the provision sin Schedule 2
(two) of these Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of N500,000.00
(five hundred thousand naira only) or three months imprisonment or both.
(2) Any person who refuses to abate the default of any condition of the licence issued after
the Secretariat had duly requested him to do so shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a
fine of N50,000.00 (fifty thousand naira only) daily for a period not exceeding two weeks
after which the establishment shall be sealed until such default is rectified and the
accumulated fine paid.
(3) Any person who willfully delays an inspector in the exercise f the power conferred on
him under the schedule, or fails to comply with his requisition or produce any document or
furnish any information he is required to produce, or withholds any information as to who
the proprietor of any premises of an educational institution is, or refuses to allow entry by a
duly authorized inspector, shall be deemed to have obstructed an officer in the execution f
his duties.
(4) Any person who obstructs an inspector in the execution of his duties under these
Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of N100,000.00 (one hundred
thousand naira only) or one month’s imprisonment or both
Composition
1 . (1) The Secretariat shall comprise of a Secretary who shall be appointed by the
President, on the recommendation of the Minister, of the status of Special Assistant, and
who shall be the Chief Executive of the Secretariat, in charge f its day to day operations;
(2) The Management Committee of the Secretariat shall consist of the following members,
to be appointed by the Minister;
(a) the secretary who is the chairman;
(b) a representative of the Minister not below GL.12 who shall be the Head of
Finance and Administration; and serves as the accounting officer of the secretariat
(c) all Directors, Heads of Departments and Units within the Secretariat, and
(e) Secretary and Legal Adviser who shall be a legal practitioner with at least not
less than 7 (seven) years post call experience who shall be assigned such duties
as the Secretary may determine.
Functions

2. The functions of the Secretariat shall include the establishment of public health
institutions, and the regulation of the health facilities, public and private, within the
Territory with a view to ensuring the highest standards in health service delivery, including
focusing on the reduction of the incidence of malaria, tuberculosis, HIV /AIDS and other
diseases within the Territory, and to perform such other functions that are incidental t the
achievement of these objectives.
Registration of Hospital and Health Institution
3. (1) The secretariat may, register under license and monitor private Health Institution and
Establishment in accordance with ‘Private-Hosptials and other Health Establishments
(Registration and Licensing) Regulations (1989) Federal Capital Territory Abuja-Nigeria
Edict’ ;
(2) The establishments affected by the provision of sub-section (1) are hospital, clinics,
Laboratories, Nursing and Maternity Homes and such other health concerns as the
Secretariat may from time to time;
(3) The secretariat shall keep record such registrations, pursuant to the provisions of subsection (1).
4. (1) There is, hereby, established a body to be known as the Regulatory Appeals
Committee herein referred to as ‘the Committee’
(2) The members of the Committee shall be 5 (five) who shall be appointed as determined
by the Minister; and
(3) A member employee of the Secretariat shall not be appointed a member of the
Committee.
Revocation of License
5. (1) Where in the opinion of the opinion of the Secretariat the holder of the license
issued pursuant to sub-section (1) of section 1 is in default of any of the conditions spelt out
therein and has not rectified the default after a demand so to do has been made by the
Secretariat, it may in addition to any penalty that may be provided under these Regulations
revoke t he license;
(2) The holder of a license revoked pursuant to sub-section (1) may within three weeks of
such revocation apply in writing to the Appeals Committee established pursuant section 2 to
review the decision of the Secretariat.
Power of the Committee
6. (1) The Committee shall receive applications from aggrieved parties with a view to
reviewing cases of de-listing carried out by the secretariat;
(2) The Committee may, after hearing both parties and giving them an opportunity to make
representations before it, either in writing or otherwise, proceed to confirm or reverse the
decision or the Secretariat or make such Order or orders as it may consider proper in any
given circumstance;

(3) In any proceeding before the Committee, an agreed or responding party may be
represented by a legal practitioner;
(4) The decision of the Committee is subject to appeal t the Minister whose division thereon
shall be final, but without prejudice to the right of the aggrieved party to seek legal redress.
Power of Inspection
7 (1) The Secretariat may upon such terms and conditions that it deems appoint persons
who shall be known as health officers or medical officers with powers to inspect the areas t
which they may be appoint and abate nuisances and otherwise enforce the powers vested in
them relating to public health.
(2) The FCT Public Health legislation is the product of Public Health Law (Chapter 109 of
1963) and gives the FCT Health Secretariat the powers to:
(a) inspect factories, manufacturing premises, printing and other occupational premises
to ensure conducive or healthy conditions for the workers employed therein
(b) conduct house to house inspection to detect and abate nuisances (as contained in
Public Health Law section 7 (a-m) (3) as Inspectors with powers :
(i) inspect food premises in restaurant, hotels etc to ensure hygienic condition of food
and food handling up to final consumption
(ii) inspect any carcasses, poultry, bakery, fish cod room, vegetable, corn, bread, flour
or other food items meant for human consumption exposed for sale, deposited in any
place for sale or prepared and intended for food of mew.
(iii) inspect any premise to abate all conditions, predisposing disease transition
(iv) inspect camps, schools, barracks, etc
(v) inoculate against diseases and issue yellow cards as per international hwealth
regulation
(4) Inspection defaulters are prescribed sanctions based on the provisions of the FCT Public
Health Law
Offences and Penalties
8 (1) Any person who willfully operates or runs health institutions within the Territory
without due registration by the Secretariat in accordance with the provision in Schedule 3
(three) of these Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a to sanctions as
prescribed under the ‘private Hospitals and Other Establishments (Registration and
Licensing) Regulation (19989), Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, Nigeria, law.
(2) Any person who refuses to abate the default of any condition of the licence issued after
the Secretariat had duly requested him to do so shall be guilty of an offence and liable to
sanctions as specified in the, Private Hospitals and other Establishments (Registration and
Licensing) Law

(3) Any person who willfully delays an inspector in the exercise of the power conferred on
him under the schedule, or fails to comply with his requisition or produce any document or
furnish any information he is required to produce, or withholds any information as to who
the proprietor of any premises of an health institution is, or refuses to allow entry by a duly
authorized inspector, shall be deemed to have obstructed an officer in the execution of his
duties.
(4) Any person who obstructs an inspector in the execution of his duties shall be
guilty of an offence and liable to sanctions under the Federal Capital Territory Public Health
Act
FOURTH SCHEDULE – Regulations 12 (1) (d)
THE SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT SECRETARIAT
Composition
1. (1) The Secretariat shall comprise of a Secretary who shall be appointed by the
President, on the recommendation of the Minister, of the status of Special Assistant, and
who shall be the Chief Executive of the Secretariat, in charge f its day to day operations;
(2) The Management Committee of the Secretariat shall consist of the following members,
to be appointed by the Minister;
(a)the secretary who is the chairman;
(b) a representative of the Minister not below GL.12 who shall be the Head of
Finance and Administration; and serves as the accounting officer of the secretariat
(c) all Directors, Heads of Departments and Units within the Secretariat, and
(f) Secretary and Legal Adviser who shall be a legal practitioner with at least not less
than 7 (seven) years post call experience who shall be assigned such duties as
the Secretary may determine.
Functions
2. The functions of the Secretariat shall include, providing a nurturing environment for
women, children and their vulnerable groups in the Territory, to oversee important social
imperatives like the provision of micro finance for vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, to
promote arts, culture and sports activities within the Territory as well as such other
functions as are incidental to the furtherance of these objectives
Registration of Social and Developmental Institution
3. (1) The secretariat may upon such terms and conditions as it may consider register under
license social and developmental establishment in the Territory
(2) The operators affected by the provision of sub-section (1) include organizations
concerned with the promotion of the rights of women, youth and children, providers of

micro-finance and such similar social schemes, the promotion of arts and culture and
sporting activities that the Secretariat may from time to time, determine;
(3) The secretariat shall keep register, pursuant to this section
4. (1) There is, hereby, established a body to be known as the Regulatory Appeals
Committee herein referred to as ‘the Committee’
(2) The members of the Committee shall be 5 (five) who shall be appointed as determined
by the Minister; and
(3) A member employee of the Secretariat shall not be appointed a member of the
Committee.
5. (1) Where in the opinion of the opinion of the Secretariat the holder of the license
issued pursuant to section 1 is in default of any of the conditions spelt out therein and has
not rectified the default after a demand so to do has been made by the Secretariat, it may
in addition to any penalty that may be provided under these Regulations revoke t he
license;
(2) The holder of a license revoked pursuant to sub-section may within three weeks of such
revocation apply in writing to the Appeals Committee established pursuant section 2 to
review the decision.
6. (1) The Committee shall receive applications from aggrieved parties with a view to
considering cases of appeal arising from the revocation of licenses;
(2) The Committee may, after hearing both parties and giving them an opportunity to make
representations before it, either in writing or otherwise, proceed to confirm or reverse the
decision or the Secretariat or make such Order or orders as it may consider proper in any
given circumstance;
(3) In any proceeding before the Committee, an agreed or responding party may be
represented by a legal practitioner;
(4) The decision of the Committee is subject to appeal t the Minister whose division thereon
shall be final, but without prejudice to the right of the aggrieved party to seek legal redress.
7. (1) The Secretariat may, upon such terms and conditions, appoint person who shall be
known as Inspectors, with powers to:
(a) enter, inspect and examine at any time of the day premises that are being used in the
related business and request the proprietor to furnish him/her with such information as
may be required in accordance with the license issued;
(b) by notice, require the proprietor, owner of any premises that is being used for this
purposes to furnish him/her with any relevant information that may be required on any
matter specified in a notice.
(c) Make such examination and enquiry as may be necessary, to ascertain whether the
provisions of the relevant Regulation pursuant thereto, are being complied with by the

holder of the license or operator or owner of any of the facilities or premises being
inspected;
(2) An Inspector may enlist ad assistance of a police officer if he apprehends serious
obtrusion in the execution of his duties under this schedule
(3) Whoever, being legally bound to render or furnish assistance to any inspector in the
execution of his duty intentionally, omits to give such assistance shall liable to a fine of
N50,000 (fifty thousand naira only) or t a term of 3 (three ) months imprisonment or both
Offences and Penalties
8 (1) Any person who willfully operates or runs social development-related establishment
within the Territory without a license duly issued by the Secretariat in accordance with the
provision sin Schedule 4(four) of these Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable
to a fine of N200,000.00 (two hundred thousand naira only) or three months imprisonment
or both.
(2) Any person who refuses to abate the default of any condition of a license issued after
the secretariat has duly requested him to do so shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a
fine of N10,000.00 (ten thousand naira only) for a period not exceeding two weeks after
which the establishment shall be sealed until such default is rectified and the accumulated
fine paid.
(3) Any person who willfully delays an inspector in the exercise f the power conferred on
him under the schedule, or fails to comply with his requisition or produce any document or
furnish any information he is required to produce, or withholds any information as to who
the proprietor of any premises of any premises of such an institution or by duly
establishment is, or refuses to allow entry by a duly authorized inspector, shall be deemed
to have obstructed an officer in the execution f his duties.
(4) Any person who obstructs an inspector in the execution of his duties be guilty of an
offence and liable t a fine of N50,000.00 (fifty thousand naira only) or one month’s
imprisonment or both.
FIFTY SCHEDULE – Regulation 12 (1) (e)
THE TRANSPORTATION SECRETARIAT
Composition
Composition
1. (1) The Secretariat shall comprise of a Secretary who shall be appointed by the
President, on the recommendation of the Minister, of the status of Special Assistant, and
who shall be the Chief Executive of the Secretariat, in charge f its day to day operations;
(2) The Management Committee of the Secretariat shall consist of the following members,
to be appointed by the Minister;
(a) the secretary who is the chairman;

(b) a representative of the Minister not below GL.12 who shall be the Head of
Finance and Administration;
(c) all Directors, Heads of Departments and Units within the Secretariat, and
(d) Secretary and Legal Adviser who shall be a legal practitioner with at least not
less than 7 (seven) years post call experience who shall be assigned such duties as
the Secretary may determine.
Functions
2. The functions of the Secretariat shall include, regulation and improvement of all
transportation –related activities within the Territory, including the development of
infrastructure for the purposes of establishing an efficient transportation system within the
Territory, and perform such other functions as are incidental to the achievement of these
objectives
Registration of Transport Operators
3. (1) The secretariat may upon such terms and conditions as it may consider register under
license all transport operators in the Territory
(2) The operators affected by the provision of sub-section (1) include taxi operators, bus
operators, rail operators, motorcycle operators, and other such operators of the mass
transit that the Secretariat may from time to time, determine
(3) The secretariat shall keep register, pursuant to this section
4. (1) There is, hereby, established a body to be known as the Regulatory Appeals
Committee herein referred to as ‘the Committee’
(2) The members of the Committee shall be 5 (five) who shall be appointed as determined
by the Minister; and
(3) A member employee of the Secretariat shall not be appointed a member of the
Committee.
5. (1) Where in the opinion of the opinion of the Secretariat the holder of the license
issued pursuant to section 1 is in default of any of the conditions spelt out therein and has
not rectified the default after a demand so to do has been made by the Secretariat, it may
in addition to any penalty that may be provided under these Regulations revoke t he
license;
(2) The holder of a license revoked pursuant to sub-section may within three weeks of such
revocation apply in writing to the Appeals Committee established pursuant section 2 to
review the decision.
6. (1) The Committee shall receive applications from aggrieved parties with a view to
considering cases of appeal arising from the revocation of licenses;

(2) The Committee may, after hearing both parties and giving them an opportunity to make
representations before it, either in writing or otherwise, proceed to confirm or reverse the
decision or the Secretariat or make such Order or orders as it may consider proper in any
given circumstance;
(3) In any proceeding before the Committee, an agreed or responding party may be
represented by a legal practitioner;
(4) The decision of the Committee is subject to appeal t the Minister whose division thereon
shall be final, but without prejudice to the right of the aggrieved party to seek legal redress.
7. (1) The Secretariat may, upon such terms and conditions, appoint person who shall be
known as Inspectors, with powers to:
(a) enter, inspect and examine at any time of the day premises that are being used in the
related business and request the proprietor to furnish him/her with such information as
may be required in accordance with the license issued;
(b) by notice, require the proprietor, owner of any premises that is being used for this
purposes to furnish him/her with any relevant information that may be required on any
matter specified in a notice.
(c) Make such examination and enquiry as may be necessary, to ascertain whether the
provisions of the relevant Regulation pursuant thereto, are being complied with by the
holder of the license or operator or owner of any of the facilities or premises being
inspected;
(2) An Inspector may enlist ad assistance of a police officer if he apprehends serious
obtrusion in the execution of his duties under this regulations and this schedule
(3) Whoever, being legally bound to render or furnish assistance to any inspector in the
execution of his duty intentionally, omits to give such assistance shall liable to a fine of
N50,000 (fifty thousand naira only) or t a term of 3 (three ) months imprisonment or both
Offences and Penalties
8 (1) Any person who willfully operates or runs transportation business within the Territory
without a license duly issued by the Secretariat in accordance with the provision sin
Schedule 4(four) of these Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of
N200,000.00 (two hundred thousand naira only) or three months imprisonment or both.
(2) Any person who refuses to abate the default of any condition of a license issued after
the secretariat has duly requested him to do so shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a
fine of N10,000.00 (ten thousand naira only) for a period not exceeding two weeks after
which the establishment shall be sealed until such default is rectified and the accumulated
fine paid.
(3) Any person who willfully delays an inspector in the exercise f the power conferred on
him under the schedule, or fails to comply with his requisition or produce any document or
furnish any information he is required to produce, or withholds any information as to who
the proprietor of any premises of any premises of such an institution or by duly

establishment is, or refuses to allow entry by a duly authorized inspector, shall be deemed
to have obstructed an officer in the execution f his duties.
(4) Any person who obstructs an inspector in the execution of his duties be guilty of an
offence and liable t a fine of N50,000.00 (fifty thousand naira only) or one month’s
imprisonment or both.
SIX SCHEDULE – Regulation 12 (2) (a)
THE SATELLITE TOWNS DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Functions
1. Subject to and in accordance with ss.4 (1) and 4 (2) f the Act, this Agency is an
administrative creation and intervention Agency of the Federal Capital Development
Authority (FCDA) charged with the responsibility for the planning and development of the
Satellite Towns within the Federal Capital Territory
Composition
2. (1) The Chairman of the Satellite Town Development Agency shall be the Executive
Secretary /Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Capital Development Secretariat ;
(2) The Satellite Towns Development Agency shall be headed by a Chief Executive
secretary /Chief Executive Officer who shall be termed the Administrator of the Agency, and
consist of 8 (eight) other members to be appointed by the Minister, with at least one
member representing each of the Area Councils.
Funding
3. (1) The Agency shall establish and maintain a Fund from which shall be defrayed all
expenditure incurred by the Agency.
(2) There shall be paid and credited to the Fund established pursuant to sub-section (1) of
this section:
(a) Any allocation to the Agency from the Federation Account;
(b) Such monies as may from time to time be granted or lent to the Agency by the Federal
Government, any Federal or State Ministry, Department or Agency, the Federal Capital
Development Authority or any of the Area Councils;
(c) Such moneys as may from time to time be granted or lent to the Agency by :
(i) The organized Private Sector;
(ii) International or donor organizations and non-governmental organizations;
(iii) Other governmental agencies or organizations.

(d) Requiring the keeping of proper accounts and records for the Fund in such forms as
may be specified in the Standing Orders.
(3) the Fund shall be managed in accordance with the rules made by the Minister which
shall include provisions :
(a) Specifying the manner in which the assets or Funds of the Agency are to be helf, and
regulating the making of payment into and out of the Fund, and
(b) Requiring the keeping of proper accounts and records for the Fund in such form as may
be specified in the Standing Orders.
Proceedings
4. (1) Subject to these Regulations, the Agency may make Standing Orders regulating its
proceedings.
(2) The quorum for any meeting of the Agency shall be the Chairman or the person
presiding and 5 other members.
(3) The Agency shall meet whenever it is summoned by the Chairman r if the Chairman is
required to do so by Notice given to him by a minimum of 5 (five) members, he shall
summon a meeting of the Agency within 14 days from the date of such Notice.
(4) At any meeting the Chairman shall preside but if he is absent, the members present
shall appoint another member to preside.
(5) Where the Agency desires the advice of any person on any particular matter, the Agency
may co-opt such person to its proceedings for such period as it deems fit, but such person
shall not vote at such meeting more court towards a quorum.
Offices and Premises
5. (1) For the purposes of carrying out its duties, the Agency may subject to the Land Use
Act:
(a) purchase or lease any interest in land or other property, and
(b) construct offices and premises and equip and maintain same
Directives by the Minister
6. The Minister may give to the Agency directives or a general nature relating to matters of
policy with regard to the performance by the Agency of its functions and it shall be the duty
of the Agency to comply with such directives.
Annual Estimates and Reports

7. (1) The Management of the Agency shall not later than 30 th September in each year,
submit to the Minister an estimate of the expenditure and income of the agency during the
next succeeding year.
(2) The Management of the Agency shall cause t be kept proper accounts of the Agency in
each year and proper records in relation thereto and cause same to be audited not later
than (6) months after the end of teach year by Auditors appointed from the list and
according to guidelines supplied by the Auditor –General of the Federation.
(3) The Management of the Agency shall prepare and submit to the Minister not later than
30th June in each year a Report in such form as the President may direct on the activities of
the Agency during the immediately proceeding year, which shall include the Audited
Accounts of the Agency for that year and the Auditors Report thereon.
Satellite Towns
8. The following areas in the F.C.T are for the time being, hereby designated Satellite Town:
(1) (a) Kusaki Yanga
(b) Kuje
(c) Rubochi Kuje Area Council
(d) Abuja South West
(e) Anagada
(f) Dobi
(g) Gwagwalada Gwagwalada Area Council
(h) Zuba
(i) Dei Dei
(j) Abaji Area Council
(k) Kwali Area Council

(l) Kubwa Bwari Area Council
(m) Bwari
(n) Karshi

(o) Gousa
(p) Abuja North Abuja Municipal Area Council
(q) Karu
(r) Nyanya
(2) Any other part of the F.C.T which the Minister may by Regulation designate a Satellite
Town
9. (1) The Fixing of the Seal of the Agency shall be authenticated by the signatures of the
Chairman and Director or any person generally or specifically authorized by the Chief
Executive Officer to act for that purpose.
(2) Any contract or instrument which if made or executed by a person not being a body
corporate would not be required to be under seal may be made or executed on behalf of the
Agency by a Director r any person generally or specifically authorized by the Agency to act
for that purpose.
SEVENTH SCHEDULE – Regulation 12 (2) (b)
THE ABUJA GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY
Functions
1. Subject to and in accordance with ss.4 (1) and 4 (2) f the Act, this Agency is an
administrative creation and intervention Agency of the Federal Capital Development
Authority (FCDA) charged with the responsibility for the planning and development of the
Satellite Towns within the Federal Capital Territory
composition
2. (1) The Chairman of the Abuja Geographic Information System Agency (AGIS) shall be
the Minister of the Federal Capital Territory
(2) The Agency shall be headed by a Chief Executive Officer who shall be termed the
Administrator of the Agency, and consist of 8 (eight) other members to be appointed by the
Minister, with at least one member representing each of the Area Councils.
Funding
3. (1) The Agency shall establish and maintain a Fund from which shall be defrayed all
expenditure incurred by the Agency.
(2) There shall be paid and credited to the Fund established pursuant to sub-section (1) of
this section:
(a) Any allocation to the Agency from the Federation Account;

(b) Such monies as may from time to time be granted or lent to the Agency by the Federal
Government, any Federal or State Ministry, Department or Agency, the Federal Capital
Development Authority or any of the Area Councils;
(c) Such moneys as may from time to time be granted or lent to the Agency by :
(i) The organized Private Sector;
(ii) International or donor organizations and non-governmental organizations;
(iii) Other governmental agencies or organizations.
(d) All other assets that may from time to time accrue to the Agency
(3) the Fund shall be managed in accordance with the rules made by the Minister which
shall include provisions :
(c) Specifying the manner in which the assets or Funds of the Agency are to be helf, and
regulating the making of payment into and out of the Fund, and
(d) Requiring the keeping of proper accounts and records for the Fund in such form as may
be specified in the Standing Orders.
Proceedings
4. (1) Subject to these Regulations, the Agency may make Standing Orders regulating its
proceedings.
(2) The quorum for any meeting of the Agency shall be the Chairman or the person
presiding and 5 other members.
(3) The Agency shall meet whenever it is summoned by the Chairman r if the Chairman is
required to do so by Notice given to him by a minimum of 5 (five) members, he shall
summon a meeting of the Agency within 14 days from the date of such Notice.
(4) At any meeting the Chairman shall preside but if he is absent, the members present
shall appoint another member to preside.
(5) Where the Agency desires the advice of any person on any particular matter, the Agency
may co-opt such person to its proceedings for such period as it deems fit, but such person
shall not vote at such meeting more court towards a quorum.
Offices and Premises
5. (1) For the purposes of carrying out its duties, the Agency may subject to the Land Use
Act:
(a) Purchase or lease any interest in land or other property, and
(b) Construct offices and premises and equip and maintain same

Directives by the Minister
6. The Minister may give to the Agency directives or a general nature relating to matters of
policy with regard to the performance by the Agency of its functions and it shall be the duty
of the Agency to comply with such directives.
Annual Estimates and Reports
7. (1) The Management of the Agency shall not later than 30 th September in each year,
submit to the Minister an estimate of the expenditure and income of the agency during the
next succeeding year.
(2) The Management of the Agency shall cause t be kept proper accounts of the Agency in
each year and proper records in relation thereto and cause same to be audited not later
than (6) months after the end of teach year by Auditors appointed from the list and
according to guidelines supplied by the Auditor –General of the Federation.
(3) The Management of the Agency shall prepare and submit to the Minister not later than
30th June in each year a Report in such form as the President may direct on the activities of
the Agency during the immediately proceeding year, which shall include the Audited
Accounts of the Agency for that year and the Auditors Report thereon.
EIGHTH SCHEDULE –Regulation (12 (2) (c)
THE ABUJA METROPOLITAN MANAGEMENT AGENCY
Functions
1. Subject t and in accordance with the ss.4 (1) (c), 4 (2) (d) and (e) of the Act, this
Agency shall be charged with the responsibility for the efficient running and operations of
municipal services within the Federal Capital Territory.
Composition
2 – (1) The Minister shall be the Chairman of the Board of the Abuja Metropolitan
Management Agency shall be headed by a Chief Executive Officer termed the Managing
Director of the Agency, and shall in addition to (1) above consist of 8 (eight) other members
to be appointed by the Minister.
Proceedings
3. (1) Subject to these Regulations, and Section 27 of the Interpretation Act, the Agency
may make Standing Orders regulating its proceedings or those of any of its Committee.
(2) The quorum of the Agency shall be t he Chairman (or the person presiding over the
meeting) and 5 other members.
(3) The Agency shall meet wherever it is summoned by the Chairman r if the
Chairman is required to do so by Notice given to him by not les than 5 (five) other
members, he shall summon a meeting f the Agency to be held within 14 days form the date
of which the Notice is given.

(4) At any meeting of the Agency, the Chairman shall preside but if he is absent, the
members present at the meeting shall appoint one of the members to preside at the
meeting.
(5) Where the Agency desires to obtain the advice of any person on any particular matter,
the Agency may co-opt him into its proceedings for such period it deems fit but such a
person shall not vote nor count towards a quorum.
Committees
4. (1) The Agency may appoint Committees to perform such functions on its behalf as it
may determine.
2. subject to and in accordance with the Act, this Agency shall be charged with the
responsibility for formulating policies n enhancing and developing the potentials of tourism,
as well as regulating the activities of tourism operator within the Territory.
Composition
3. The Abuja Tourism Agency shall be headed by a Chief Executive Officer termed the
General Manager, and consist of 8(eight) other members to be appointed by the Minister.
4. (1) The tourism operators affected by the provision of Section 1 are hotels, travel agents,
clubs, restaurants, tour operators and such other travel and hospitality concerns as the
Agency may from time to time determine;
Regulatory Committee
5. (1) There is hereby established a body to be known as the Regulatory Appeals
Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee;
(2) The members of the Committee shall be 5 (five) who shall be appointed as
determined y the Minister; and
(3) A member or employee of the Agency shall not be appointed a member of the
Committee.
6. Where in the opinion of the Board the holder of licenses:
(1) issued pursuant to Section 1 is default of any of the conditions spelt out therein and has
not rectified the default after a demand so to do has been made by the Agency, it may in
addition t any penalty that may be provided under these Regulations and schedule revoke
the license;
(2) The holder of a license revoke pursuant to sub-section (1) may within 3 (three) weeks
of such revocation apply in writing t the Appeals Committee established pursuant to Section
3 to review the decision of the Agency.
Powers

7. (1) The Committee shall receive applications from aggrieved parties with view t
considering cases of appeal arising from the revocation of licenses carried out by the Agency
;
(2) The Committee may after hearing both parties and giving them an opportunity to make
representations before it either in writing or otherwise proceed to confirm r reverse the
decision of the Agency or make such Order or Orders as it may insider proper in any given
circumstances;
(3) In any proceeding before the Committee, an agreed or responding party may be
represented by a legal practitioner;
(4) The decision of the Committee is subject to appeal to the Minister whose decision
thereon shall be final but without prejudice to the right of the aggrieved
Powers of Inspection
7. (1) The Agency may, upon such terms and conditions which it deems fit, appoint person
who shall be known as Inspectors with powers to:
(a) enter, inspect and examine at any time of the day premises that are ring used as
agricultural establishments and request the proprietor or owner t furnish him in such
from as he may direct, with any information on any matter specified in accordance with
the relevant Regulations.
(b) By notice, require the proprietor, owner of any premises that is being used as an
tourism or hospital establishment, to furnish him in such form as he may direct, with
any information on any matter specified by him
(c) Make such examination and enquiry as may be necessary, to ascertain whether the
provisions of the relevant Regulation pursuant thereto, are being complied with by the
concerned establishment or owner of any tourism and hospital establishment;
(2) An Inspector may enlist ad assistance of a police officer if he apprehends serious
obtrusion in the execution of his duties under this Section
(3) Whoever, being legally bound to render or furnish assistance to any inspector in the
execution of his duty intentionally, omits to give such assistance shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or a fine of N50,000 (fifty
thousand naira only) or both
GRANT OF PARDON ALHAJI IBRAHIM DAMCIDA S.1. 15 2004
CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA 1999
In exercise of the powers conferred on me by Section of the constitution of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria 1999, and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I Olusegun
Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria hereby grant pardon to the following,
that is -.
S/No. Name

1. ALHAJI IBRAHIM DAMCIDA
Made at Abuja, this 18th Day of March, 2004
Olusegun Obasanjo,
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT
(1961 No. 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (CURFEW) REGULATIONS S.I. 9 2004
WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305 (1), (3) (c) and (d) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has
declared that a state of emergency exists in the Plateau State of Nigeria;
Now, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the
Emergency Powers Act (as modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I,
Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, hereby make the following
Regulations –
1. The Administrator may by order, impose a curfew upon the inhabitants of the emergency
area of any part thereof.
2. (1) Every curfew order shall be made known to the inhabitants of the area to
which it relates in such manner as the Administrator thinks fit, and shall come
into operation on the date on which it is so made known
(2) Without prejudice to any other mode of proof, a certificate signed by the
Administrator or at his direction stating the terms of any curfew order and the
date on which it came into operation in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph (1) shall be conclusive evidence of those matters
(3) As soon as may be after any such order has been made, it shall be published by
notice in the State Gazette
3. Where a curfew has been imposed in any area, no person other than a police officer or a
member of the armed forces of the Federation, or a person registered as a medical
practitioner, or any other persons authorised in writing under these Regulations shall
be abroad within the area between such hours as may be specified in the curfew
order (hereinafter referred to as the hours of curfew).
4. (1) Any superior police officer may issue to any person applying therefore a written
permit authorizing the holder thereof to be abroad within a curfew area during such times
and for such purposes and subject to such conditions or limitations as may be specified in
such permit.

(2) It shall be a condition of every such permit that the person to whom it has been
granted shall carry it on his person at all times when he is abroad in a curfew
area during the hours of curfew.
(3) Every such permit shall, on demand, be produced for the inspection of a police
office or a member of the armed forces of the Federation.
(4) Any person to whom a permit has been granted under this regulation who fails to
produce it when lawfully required to do so shall be liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding N5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months.
5. Any person found abroad in any curfew area contrary to the provisions of these
regulations may be arrested without warrant by a police officer or a member of the
armed forces of the Federation, and shall liable on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding N10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to
both.
6. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires
“Administrator” means the Administrator appointed pursuant to regulation 1 of the
Emergency Powers (General) Regulations 2004 to administer the Government of the
emergency area;
“Emergency area” or “State” means the Plateaus State of Nigeria;
7. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency Powers (General) Regulations 2004.
MADE at Abuja this 18th day of May, 2004
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note does not form apart of the above Regulations but is intended to explain its
purport)
The Regulations, among other things, provides for the powers of the Administrator to
impose curfew in the emergency area.
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT (1961 No. 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (PROTECTED PLACES) REGULATIONS 2004

18th May 2004

WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305 (1), (3) (c) and (d) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has
declared that a state of emergency exists in the Plateau State of Nigeria;
Now, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the
Emergency Powers Act (as modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I,
Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, hereby make the following
Regulations –
1. The Administrator may, if it appears to him to be necessary or expedient –
(a) for the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the life of the community; or
(b) for securing the public safety; or
(c) that special precautions should be taken to prevent the entry of unauthorised
persons, by order, declare those premises to be a protected place for the
purpose of these Regulations and so long as the order is in force no person
shall, subject to any exemptions for which provision may be made by the
order, enter or attempt to enter or be in those premises without the
permission of such authority or person as may be specified in the order
2. Every person to whom permission to enter a protected place is granted pursuant to
regulation 1 of these Regulations shall, while in that place, comply with such
directions for regulating his conduct as may be given by the Administrator or by the
authority or person granting the permission, and any authorised officer or any
person authorised in that behalf by the occupier of the premises, may search any
person entering or seeking to enter or being in any protected place, and may detain
any such person for the purpose of searching him
3. If any person is in a protected place in contravention of these Regulations or while in any
such place, fails to comply with any direction given under these Regulations, then without
prejudice of any proceedings which may be taken against him, he may removed therefrom
by any authorised officer or any person authorised in that behalf by the occupier of the
premises
4. (1) The Administrator may authorise such steps to be taken as he may deem necessary
for the protection of any protected place, and such steps may extend to the taking of
defensive measures which involve or may involve danger to the life of any person entering
or attempting to enter any protected place.
(2) Where any measures involving such danger as aforesaid are adopted, the senior officer
of police responsible for the locality in which the protected place is situated shall cause such
precautions to be taken, including the prominent display of warning notices, as he deems
reasonably necessary to prevent inadvertent or accidental entry into the protected place
and, where such precautions have been duly taken, no’ person shall be entitled to
compensation or damages in respect of injury received or death caused as a result of any
unauthorized envy into the protected piece.

5. If any person enters or attempts to enter a protected place in contravention of these
Regulations, or while in a protected place fails to comply with any direction given under
these Regulations he commits an offence and shall be liable(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years;
or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years.
6. In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires
“Administrator” means the Administrator appointed pursuant to the regulation 1 of the
Emergency Powers (General) Regulations 2004, to administer the Government of the
emergency area;
“authorized officer” means any administrative officer, superior offices commissioned officer
of the armed forces of the Federation and includes tiny person acting on behalf of the
Administrator;
“emergency area” means the Plateau State of Nigeria;
“protected place” means any premises in respect of which an order has bed made by the
Administrator in pursuance of regulation I of these Regulations.
7. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency Powers (Protected Places Regulations
2004.
MADE at Abuja this 18th day of May, 2004
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note does not form apart of the above Regulations
but is intended to explain its purport)
The Regulations, among other things, provides for the powers of the Administrator to
impose curfew in the emergency area.
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT
(1961 No 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (PROCESSIONS AND MEETINGS, ETC.) REGULATIONS 2004
Commencement : 18th May, 2004

WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305(1), (3) (c) and (d) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 the Presidential of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has
declared that a state of emergency exists in the plateau State of Nigeria;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the
Emergency powersAct (as modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I,
Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, hereby make the following
Regulations –
1. The Administrator, if satisfied that the holding of any public procession, demonstration or
public meeting of any description or that such procession, demonstration or meeting in or in
any part of the emergency area would be likely to cause serious public disorder, he may by
order prohibit, for such period as may be specified in the order, the holding or public
procession, demonstration or public meeting of any description thereof in that area or part
thereof
2. Any police officer may take such steps and use such force as may be necessary to secure
compliance with any order made under these Regulations.
3. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of any order made under these
Regulations commits an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding two years or to a fine not less than N25,000 or to both such fine
and imprisonment.
4. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires “Administrator” means the Administrator appointed pursuant to regulation 1 of the
Emergency Powers (General) Regulations 2004 to administer the Government of the
emergency area;
“emergency area” means the Plateau State of Nigeria;
“Public meeting” means a procession in a public place and includes a demonstration; and
public procession means a procession in a public place and includes a demonstration"
“public place” includes any public way, and any building, place or conveyance, to which for
the time being the public is entitled or permitted to have access, either without any
condition or upon condition of making any payment, and any building or place which is for
the time being used for any public or religious meeting or assembly, or as an open court.
5. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency Powers (processions and Meetings,
etc) Regulations 2004.
MADE at Abuja this 18th day of May, 2004
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
EXPLANATORY NOTE

(This note does not form part of the above Regulations but is intended to explain its
purport)
The Regulations, among other things, provides for the power of the Administrator to prohibit
public processions, demonstrations and meetings where necessary.
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT
(1961 No 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (REPORTING OF PERSONS.) REGULATIONS 2004
Commencement : 18th May, 2004
WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305(1), (3) (c) and (d) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 the Presidential of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has
declared that a state of emergency exists in the plateau State of Nigeria;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the
Emergency powers Act (as modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I,
Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, hereby make the following
Regulations –
1 (1) The Administrator may, if he deems it expedient for securing the public safety or for
the maintenance or restoration of public order, issue a direction in writing requiring any
person in the emergency area to whom the direction is addressed to report tot such place in
the emergency area and with such time as may be therein prescribed and thereafter to
comply with such instructions regarding his movements as may be given by the
Administrator.
(2) No such direction shall remain in for a period exceeding 21 days from the day on which
the person to whom it is addressed receives it, but upon the expiration of any such period,
the Administrator may issue a further direction.
2. (1) The Administrator shall as soon as reasonably practicable after a direction has been
made under these Regulations, transmit a copy of the direction to the President and if the
President gives notice to the Administrator that the President disallows t he direction it shall
cease to have effect on the expiration of the day on which the notice is given.
(2) Nothing is paragraph (1) of this Regulation shall affect anything done or purported to
have been done under such direction.
3. (1) For the purpose of these Regulations a direction shall be deemed to have received if it
is either -(a) delivered or the purport thereof made known to the person to whom it is addressed; or
(b) delivered to the usual place of abode or business of such person
(2) If a person is charged with an offence under these Regulations in a case where subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of this regulation applies it shall be a defence for him to

prove that he was absent from his usual place of abode or business as the case may be
when the direction was delivered in pursuance of the said sub-paragraph (b) and that on his
return to that place he tool immediate steps to comply with the direction.
4. Any person who receives a direction in pursuance of these Regulations and knowingly
fails to comply with the requirements thereof, commits an offence and shall be liable on
summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to a fine of
N10,000 or to both such fine and imprisonment.
5. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires -“Administrator” means the Administrator appointed pursuant to regulation 1 of the
Emergency area” means the Plateau State of Nigeria.
6. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency powers (Reporting of Persons)
Regulations 2004.
MADE at Abuja this 18th day of May, 2004
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
The Regulations, among other things, provides for the power for persons to report at such
place in the emergency area.
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT
(1961 No 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (REPORTING OF PERSONS.) REGULATIONS 2004
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT
(1961 No 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (REPORTING OF PERSONS.) REGULATIONS 2004
Commencement : 18th May, 2004
WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305(1), (3) (c) and (d) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 the Presidential of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has
declared that a state of emergency exists in the plateau State of Nigeria;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the
Emergency powers Act (as modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I,
Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, hereby make the following
Regulations –

1 (1) The Administrator may, if he deems it expedient for securing the public safety or for
the maintenance or restoration of public order, issue a direction in writing requiring any
person in the emergency area to whom the direction is addressed to report tot such place in
the emergency area and with such time as may be therein prescribed and thereafter to
comply with such instructions regarding his movements as may be given by the
Administrator.
(2) No such direction shall remain in for a period exceeding 21 days from the day on which
the person to whom it is addressed receives it, but upon the expiration of any such period,
the Administrator may issue a further direction.
2. (1) The Administrator shall as soon as reasonably practicable after a direction has been
made under these Regulations, transmit a copy of the direction to the President and if the
President gives notice to the Administrator that the President disallows t he direction it shall
cease to have effect on the expiration of the day on which the notice is given.
(2) Nothing is paragraph (1) of this Regulation shall affect anything done or purported to
have been done under such direction.
3. (1) For the purpose of these Regulations a direction shall be deemed to have received if it
is either -(a) delivered or the purport thereof made known to the person to whom it is addressed; or
(b) delivered to the usual place of abode or business of such person
(2) If a person is charged with an offence under these Regulations in a case where subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of this regulation applies it shall be a defence for him to
prove that he was absent from his usual place of abode or business as the case may be
when the direction was delivered in pursuance of the said sub-paragraph (b) and that on his
return to that place he tool immediate steps to comply with the direction.
4. Any person who receives a direction in pursuance of these Regulations and knowingly
fails to comply with the requirements thereof, commits an offence and shall be liable on
summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to a fine of
N10,000 or to both such fine and imprisonment.
5. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires -“Administrator” means the Administrator appointed pursuant to regulation 1 of the
Emergency area” means the Plateau State of Nigeria.
6. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency powers (Reporting of Persons)
Regulations 2004.
MADE at Abuja this 18th day of May, 2004
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria

The Regulations, among other things, provides for the power for persons to report at such
place in the emergency area.
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT
(1961 No 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (RESTRICTION ORDERS.) REGULATIONS 2004
Commencement: 18th May, 2004
WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305(1), (3) (c) and (d) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 the Presidential of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has
declared that a state of emergency exists in the plateau State of Nigeria;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the
Emergency powers Act (as modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I,
Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, hereby make the following
Regulations –
1. (1) The Administrator, if satisfied with respect to any particular person, that for the
purpose of maintaining public order in the emergency area it is necessary so to do, may
make an order (in this order Referred To As “Restriction Order ”for both or either of the
following purposes, that is –
(a) for securing that, except in so far as may be permitted by the order, or by a permit in
writing issued by the Administrator, he shall be and remain, or that he shall not be, in any
such place or area as may be specified;
(b) for requiring him to notify his movements, in such manner, at such times and to such
authority or person as may be specified.
(2) A permit issued under paragraph (1) (a) of this regulation may contain such terms and
conditions as the Administrator deems expedient.
(3) A restriction order shall come into force immediately upon the service thereof on the
restricted person; and, if at time of such service the restricted person is within the place or
area specified, he may be removed from that place or area by any police officer or any
person authorised in that behalf in writing by the Administrator, and shall, while being so
removed, be deemed to be in lawful custody.
(4) Without prejudice to any proceedings which may be taken against a restricted person
under regulation 3 of these Regulations, a restricted person who is at any time in any place
or area in contravention of the provisions of a restriction order, or any term or condition of a
permit issued under paragraph (1) (a) of this regulation, may be removed form the place or
area by any police officer or any person authorized in that behalf in writing by the
Administrator, and shall, while being so removed, be deemed to be in lawful custody.
2. The Administrator shall, as soon as reasonably practicable after the order has been made
under these Regulations, transmit a copy of the order to the President for approval and if
the President gives notice to the Administrator that the President disallows the order, it shall

cease to have effect on the expiration of the day on which the notice is given, without
prejudice to anything done thereunder.
3. Any person who --(a) Contravenes the provisions of a restriction order; or
(b) Fails to comply with any term or condition of a permit issued under paragraph (1) (a) of
regulation 1 of these Regulations,

commits an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 2 years or to a fine of N50,000 or to both such fine and imprisonment
4. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires “Administrator” mean the Administrators appointed pursuant to the Emergency Powers
(General) Regulations 2004 to administer the Government of the emergency area;
“Emergency area” means the Plateau State of Nigeria;
“Restricted person” means a person in respect of whom a restriction order is in force;
“Specified” means specified in the order or permit, as the case may be.
5. These regulations may be cited as the Emergency Powers (Restriction Orders)
Regulations 2004.
MADE at Abuja this 18th day of May 2004.
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO,
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note does not form part of these Regulations but is intend to explain its purport)
The Regulations, among other things, provides for the restriction of any person in the
emergency area.
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT
(1961 No. 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (GENERAL) REGULATIONS S.I. 7 2004
WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305 (1), (3) (c) and (d) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has
declared that a state of emergency exists in the Plateau State of Nigeria;

Now, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the
Emergency Powers Act (as modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I,
Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, hereby make the following
Regulations –
Appointment of Administrator, etc, for the Emergency Area
1. There shall be an Administrator for the Emergency Area who shall be appointed resident and shall hold his
appointment at the pleasure of the President.
2.-(1) The Administrator may appoint persons to perform, or assist in the lance of such of the functions of the
Administrator (whether under these ions or not) as the Administrator may determine,
(2) A person appointed in pursuance of this regulation shall hold his appointment at the pleasure of the
Administrator.
(3) The Instrument by which a person is appointed in pursuance of these regulations may designate him as
“Commissioner” or “Assistant Commissioner”, or by such other designation as the Administrator may by order
specify; and any such order may provide for the relative seniority of persons to whom different designations
allocated.
(4) A person appointed in pursuance of these regulations shall not vacate his appointment by reason only of the fact
that the appointment of the Administrator is vacated
(5) A person appointed in pursuance of these regulations shall, in performing any functions which he is required by
the Administrator to perform, comply with any directions given to him by the Administrator.
(6) The fact that a person has been appointed to perform any functions of the administrator shall not preclude the
Administrator from performing such functions.
Administration of the Emergency Area
3.- (I) Without prejudice to the provisions of regulation 2 of these regulations, the Administrator shall be charged
with the general functions of administering the Government of the emergency area and of exercising the executive
authority of the State.
(2) Subject to Chapter IV of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria which relates to fundamental human
rights) and paragraph (3) of these ions, the Administrator may do such things as appear to him necessary or
expedient for the purpose of exercising his general functions.
(3) The President may give directions to the Administrator with respect to the exercise of the Administrator’s
functions, and it shall he the duty of the Administrator to comply with the directions,
4.-(I) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by paragraph (2) of regulation 3 of these
Regulations, the Administrator (but not any other person appointed in pursuance of these Regulation,) may, make
such orders as appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of maintaining and securing peace, public
order, public safety and good government In the emergency area.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by paragraph (2) o regulation 3 of these Regulations
or paragraph (I) of this regulation, any order undo the foregoing paragraph may in particular, so far as it appears to
the Administrator t be necessary or expedient for the purpose mentioned in the said paragraphs

(a) make provision for the detention of person(s) either within the emergent area or elsewhere) and the removal and
exclusion of persons from the emergent area;
(b) authorize the taking of possession or control of any property or undertaking in the emergency area;
(c) authorize the entry anti search of any premises ,
(d) provide for the application of any law or without modification, in relation that area;
(e) provide for the payment of compensation and remuneration to person affected by the order;
(f) provide for the apprehension, trial and punishment of persons offend against the order; and
(g) provide for the maintenance of such supplies and services as Administrator considers essential to the lives of
persons in the emergency area.
(3) Nothing in paragraph (2) of these regulations shall authorize the making provision for the trial of person by
military coin is.
(4) An order made under these regulations may provide that the order shall have effect for all purposes as if it were a
Law made by the house of Assembly of that State.
(5) The Administrator shall, as soon as reasonably practicable after an order has been made under these regulations,
transmit a copy of the order to the President for the approval of each House of the National Assembly. and if the
President t notice to the Administrator that the National Assembly disallows the order, it cease to have effect on the
expiration of the day on which the notice is given, with prejudice to anything previously done thereunder.
5. Subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of section 215 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
1999 (which provides, for the President or other Minister of the Government of the Federation to give directions to
the Inspector General of Police with respect to public safety and order) and of any directions in pursuance of that
subsection, the Administrator (but not any other person appointed in pursuance of these Regulations) may give to
the Commissioner of in the emergency area such directions with respect to the maintenance anti secure public safety
and public order as the Administrator considers expedient and it shall the duty of the Commissioner of Police to
comply with the directions.
6. - (1) Expect to such extent and during such period (if any) as the Administrator ay direct, no person holding or
acting or purporting to hold or act in any of the offices established for the State and specified in paragraph (2) of this
regulation shall exercise any of the functions of such office.
(2) The offices aforesaid are the office of the Governor, Deputy Governor, Commissioner or member of the State
Executive Council, the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, the Clerk or other officer or member of the House of Assembly of
the State and such her offices as the Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
(3) It shall be the duty of any person holding
(a) offices in the public service of the State within the meaning of the .Constitution of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria 1999; or
(b) offices connected with any customary court or local government authority established by law in the State, to
exercise their functions in accordance with any directions given to them by the Administrator and without prejudice
to the generality of the powers conferred on the administrator by virtue of these regulations he may suspend from
office any such person as aforesaid who in his opinion fails to comply with a direction given under this paragraph of
this regulation and may appoint some other person to act in the place of the suspended person.

Miscellaneous Provisions
7. Any instrument purported to be signed by the Administrator or by a person describing himself in the instrument
by any designation specified by or by an order lade under regulation 3 of these Regulations shall, until the contrary
is proved, be deemed to be signed by the Administrator or, as the case may be, by a person appointed pursuance of
that regulation.
8. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires
”Administrator” means the Administrator appointed pursuant to regulation 1 of these Regulations;
“emergency area” or “State” means the Plateau State of Nigeria;
9. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency Powers (General) Regulations 2006.
MADE at Abuja this 18th day of May, 2004
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note does not form apart of the above Regulations
but is intended to explain its purport)
The Regulations, among other things, provides for the powers of the Administrator to
impose curfew in the emergency area.
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT
(1961 No 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (DETENTION OF PERSONS.) REGULATIONS 2004
Commencement: 18th May, 2004
WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305(1), (3) (c) and (d) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 the Presidential of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has
declared that a state of emergency exists in the plateau State of Nigeria;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the
Emergency powers Act (as modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I,
Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, hereby make the following
Regulations –
1. (1) If the Administrator is satisfied that any person in the emergency area is or recently
has been concerned in acts prejudicial to the public safety or in the preparation or
instigation of such acts and that by reason thereof it is necessary to exercise control over

him, he may make an order against that person directing that he be detained in nay place in
the emergency area specified in the order.
(2) An order under this regulation may be made either orally or in writing, but if made orally
it shall subsequently be confirmed in witting, and in either case it shall be complied with
forthwith.
(3) Any person detained in pursuance of an order made under paragraph (1) of this
regulation shall be deemed to be in lawful custody.
2. (1) Any superior police officer, any military officer not below the rank of Captain, or any
Naval Officer not below the rank of Lieutenant, or any Air Force officer not below the rank of
Flight Lieutenant may enter without warrant at any time and search any building (including
a dwelling house), ship, aircraft, vehicle or place in upon which he has reasonable cause to
believe that there is or is likely to be
(a) any person against whom an order has been made under regulation 1 or these
Regulations; or
(b) any seditious or subversive document, pamphlet or literature; or
(c) anything which may afford evidence of the preparation, instigation or commission of any
act referred to in regulation 1 or
(d) any firearm or ammunition owned, possessed or kept contrary to law, and where any
such person or thing is found, may arrest the person or seize the thing, as the case may be.
(2) Any person conducting a search in pursuance of powers upon him by paragraph (1) of
this regulation may be assisted in the search by such other persons as he may deem
necessary for the purpose.
(3) Where any person is conducting a search in pursuance of powers conferred upon him by
paragraph (1) of this regulation, the provisions of sections 34 and 84 of the Criminal
procedure Code shall apply as though he were conducting such search in the execution of a
search warrant.
(4) Any thing seized under the provisions of paragraph (1) of this regulation may be
detained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of section 86 of the Criminal
Procedure code, as though it had been seized in the execution of a search warrant.
3. An order of the Administrator made under the provisions of paragraph (1) of regulation 1
of these Regulations, shall be full authority to the person or persons to whom the order is
given to arrest the person against whom it is made and to detain him during such time as
the order is in force.
4. At any time after an order has been made against any person under the provisions of
paragraph (1) of regulation 2 of these Regulations, the Administrator my direct
(a) that the person do detained be removed to any other place of detention within the
emergency area, or with the consent of the President, elsewhere in Nigeria;

(b) that the operation of the order be suspended subject to such conditions --(i) prohibiting or restricting the possession or use by the person of any specified articles;
(ii) imposing on him such restrictions as may be specified in the direction in respect of his
employment or business, in respect of the place of his residence, and in respect of his
association or communication with other persons;

(iii) prohibiting him from being out of doors between such hours as may be so specified except
under the authority of a written permit granted by such authority or person as may be so
specified.
(iv) requiring him to notify his movements, in such manner, at such times, and to such
authority or person as may be so specified;
(v) prohibiting him from travelling except in accordance with permission given to him by
such authority or person as may be so specified, as the Administrator thinks fit, and the
Administrator may revoke any such direction if he is satisfied that the person against whom
the order was made has failed to observe any condition so imposed, or that the operation of
the order can no longer remain suspended without detriment to the public safety.
5. The Administrator shall, as soon as reasonably practicable after an order has been made
under these regulations transmit a copy of the order to the President; and if the President
gives notice to the Administrator that he disallows the order, it shall cease to have effect on
the expiration of the day on which the notice is given, without prejudice to anything
previously does thereunder.
6. In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires”Administrator” means the Administrator appointed pursuant to regulation 1 of the Emergency Powers (General)
Regulations 2004 to administer the Government a the emergency area;
“emergency area” means the Plateau State of Nigeria;
These regulations may be cited as the Emergency Powers (Detention of Persons Regulations 2004.
MADE AT ABUJA this 18th day of May, 2004.
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO,
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note does not form part of these Regulations but is intended to explain its purport.)
These Regulations, among other things, provides for the search, arrest without detention of persons in the emergency
area.

EMERGENCY POWERS (CONTROL OF ARMS AND EXPLOSIVES) REGULATIONS S.I. 8
2004
EMERGENCY POWERS ACT (1961 No. 1)
EMERGENCY POWERS (CONTROL OF ARMS AND EXPLOSIVES) REGULATIONS 2004
[18th May, 2004]
WHEREAS in pursuance of the section 305(1), (3)(d) and (e) of the Constitution of to Federal Republic of Nigeria.
1999, the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as declared that a state of emergency exists in the Plateau
State of Nigeria;
NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 3 of the Emergency Powers Act (as
modified) and of all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I, Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria hereby hake the following Regulations.
l. Subject to directions, if any given by the Administrator, any superior police officer may exercise in the emergency
area all or any of the powers conferred upon the administrator by regulation 2 of these regulations.
2.- (1) The Administrator may by order made in respect of the whole or any part of the emergency area prohibit,
either absolutely or conditionally, the possession by any class of person of any explosive, ammunition, arms or
component parts thereof, and any such order may be made with respect to all explosives, ammunition, arms and
component parts thereof or with respect to any class of explosives, ammunition, amts component parts thereof.
(2) The Administrator may by order made in respect of the whole or any part of emergency area provide for the
custody of explosives, ammunition, arms and component parts thereof, as he shall deem fit.
(3) Every person who, in any such area as may be specified in an order made pursuant to paragraph (2), has in his
possession, custody or control any explosive, ammunition, arms or component part thereof, shall comply with such
directions in respect thereof as may be given by any police officer in the district in which the articles are situated;
and the directions may require the removal of the articles to such place as y be specified therein.
(4) If any directions given by any police officer under paragraph (3) are not plied with, then (without
prejudice to any proceedings which may be taken in t of the offence) the said officer may cause the articles to which
the directions to be dealt with in such manner as may be necessary for securing compliance the directions.
3. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of any order or direction or given under these
regulations commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years
4. In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires
“Administrator” means the Administrator appointed pursuant to the regulation the Emergency Powers (General)
Regulations 2004 to administer the Government of the emergency area;
“ammunition” includes all materials for loading firearms, percussion caps and gunpowder of every hind;
“arms” means offensive weapons and includes firearms of all descriptions;
“emergency area” means the Plateau State of Nigeria;

“explosives” includes gunpowder of every kind, rockets, nitroglycerine, dynamite, gun-cotton, blasting powder,
detonators, fulminate of mercury or other metals, and ovary other explosive substance being any compound of or
having any ingredients in common with any of the above;
“firearms” includes any cannon, gun, rifle, machine-gun, cap-gun, flint-lock gun, revolver, pistol or other firearm
whether whole or in detached pieces; and
“offensive weapons” includes air guns, air pistols, bows and arrows, spears, cutlasses, matchets, daggers, cudgels or
any piece of wood, metal or stone capable of being used as an offensive weapon.
5. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency Powers (Control of Arms and Explosives) Regulations 2006.
MADE AT ABUJA this 18th day of May, 2004.
OLUSEGUN OBASANJO
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note does not form part of these Regulations but is intended to explain its purport.)
The Regulations, among other things, provides for the control of arms and explosives in the emergency area.

CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA 1999
GRANT OF PARDON
Commencement: 1st June 2000
In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 175 of the
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 and of all other powers
enabling me in that behalf, I, OLUSEGUN OBASANJO, President of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria after consultation with the Council of State,
hereby grant pardon to the following, that is S/No. Name
1. Mallam Shehu Sani.
2. Ben Charles Obi.
3. Sanusi Mato.
4. Felix Ndamaigida.
5. Julius Badejo.

6. Mathew Popoola.
7. George Mbah.
8. Kunle Ajibade.
9. Moses Ayegba.
10. Miss Rebecca Onyabi Ikpe.
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA, 1999
ELECTION TRIBUNAL AND COURT PRACTICE DIRECTIONS, S.I.7 2007
Commencement. 3rd April, 2007.
In the exercise of the powers conferred on me by Section 285 (3) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999, Paragraph 50 of the First Schedule to the Electoral Act. 2006
and by virtue of all other powers enabling_ me in that behalf, I, Umaru Abdullahi, CON.
President, Court of Appeal. hereby issue the following Practice Directions: These Practice
Directions shall apply to the Presidential, Governorship, National Assembly and States
Assembly election petition.
1.-(1) All petitions to be presented before the Tribunal or Court shall he accompanied by:
(a) list of all the witnesses that the petitioner intends to call in proof of the petition;
(b) written statements on oath of the witnesses, and
(c) copies or list of every document to be relied on at the beat in, of the petition.
(2) A petition which tails to comply with sub-paragraph (I) of this paragraph shall not be
accepted for film,- by the Secretary.
2. The Respondent’s Reply shall be a statement in summary form and shall he supported by
copies of documentary evidence, list of witnesses and the written statements on oath.
3.-(I) Within 7 days after the filing and service not the Petitioner’s Reply on the Respondent, or 7
days after the tiling and service of the Respondents Reply, whichever is the case, the Petitioner
shall apply• for the issuance of pre-hearing notice as in Form TF 007.
(2) Upon application by a petitioner under sub-paragraph (i) above. the Tribunal or Court shall
issue to the parties or their Legal Practitioners (if any) a pre-hearing conference notice as in
Form TF 007 accompanied by a pre-hearing information sheet as in Form’ LF 008 lot the
purposes set out hereunder:

(a) disposal of all matters which can he dealt with on interlocutory application:
(b) giving such directions as to the future course of the petition as appear best adapted to secure
its just, expeditious and economical disposal in view of the urgency of election petitions;
(c) giving directions on order of witnesses to be called and such documents to be tendered by
each party to prove their cases having in view the need to expeditious disposal of the petition;
(d) fixing clear dates for hearing of the petition.
(3) The Respondent may bring the application in accordance with sub-paragraph (I) above where
the Petitioner tails to do so or by motion which shall be served on the Petitioner and returnable in
3 clear days. apply for an order to dismiss the petition.
(4) Where file Petitioner and the Respondent fail to brim an application under this paragraph, file
Tribunal or Court shall dismiss the petition as abandoned petition and no application for
extension of time to take that step shall be filed or entertained.
(5) Dismissal of a petition pursuant to sub-paragraphs (3) and (4) above is final, and accordingly
the Tribunal or Court shall be functus officio.
(6) At the pre-hearing session, the Tribunal or Court shall enter a Scheduling Order for:
(a) joining other parties to the petition;
(b) amending petition or reply or any other processes;
(c) filing and adoption of Written Addresses on all interlocutory applications;
(d) additional pre-hearing session:
(e) order of witnesses and tendering, of documents that will be necessary for the expeditious
disposal of the petition:
(f) any other mutters that will promote the quick disposal of the petition in the circumstances.
(7) At the pre-hearing session. the Tribunal or Court shall consider and take appropriate action in
respect of the following as may be necessary or desirable:
(a) amendments and further and better particulars;
(b) the admissions of facts, documents and other evidence by consent of the panics:
(c) formulation and settlement of issues for trial:
(d) hearing and determination of objections on point of law:

(e) control and scheduling of discovery. inspection and production of documents;
(f) narrowing the field of dispute between certain types of witnesses especially the Commission’s
staff and witnesses that officiated at the election. by their participation at pre-hearing session or
in any other manner:
(g) giving order or direction, for hearing of cross-petitions or any particular issue in the petition
or for consolidation with other petitions:
(h) determining the form and substance of the pre-hearing order;
(i) such other matters as may facilitate the just and speedy disposal of the petition hearing in
mind the urgency of election petitions.
(8) At the pre-hearing session. the Tribunal or Court shall ensure that hearing is not delayed by
the number of witnesses and objections to documents to be tendered and shall pursuant to subparagraphs (2)(b). (2)(e). (7)(h) and (7)(c) above:
(a) allow parties to admit or exclude documents by consent;
(b) direct parties to streamline the number of witnesses to those v, those testimonies are relevant
and indispensable.
(9) The pre-healing session or series of pre-hearing sessions with respect to any petition shall he
completed within 30 days of its commencement, and the parties and their Legal Practitioners
shall cooperate with the Tribunal or Court in working within this time table. As far as
practicable, pre-Hearing sessions shall be held from day to day or adjourned only for purposes of
compliance with pre-hearing session. unless extended by the Chairman or the presiding Justice.
(10) After pre-hearing session or series of fire-Hearing sessions the Tribunal or Court shall issue
a Report. This Report shall guide the subsequent course of the proceedings unless modified by
the Tribunal or Court.
(11) If a party or his Legal practitioner fails to attend the pie hearing, session or obey a
scheduling or pre-Bearing order or is substantially unprepared to participate in the session or
fails to participate in good faith, the Tribunal or Court shall.
(a) in the case of the petitioner dismiss the petition;
(b) in the case of a respondent enter judgment against him.
(12) Any judgment given under sub-paragraph (11) above may be set aside upon an application
made within 7 days of the Judgment (which shall not be extended) with all order as to costs of a
sum not less than N20,000. The application shall he accompanied by an undertaking to
participate effectively in the pre-hearing session jointly signed by the applicant and the Legal
Practitioner representing him.

(13) The Tribunal or Court shall direct the pre-hearing session with due regard to its purposes
and agenda as provided under this paragraph and shall require panics or their Legal Practitioners
to cooperate with it effectively in dealing with the session’s agenda.
4.-(1) Subject to any statutory provision or any provision of these Paragraphs relating to
evidence. any fact required to be proved at the hearing of a petition shall be proved by written
deposition and oral examination
(2) Documents which parties consented to at the pre-hearing session on other exhibits shall he
tendered from the Bar or by the party where he is not represented by a Legal Practitioner.
(3) There shall be no oral examination of a witness during his evidence-in-chief except to lead
the witness to adopt his written deposition and tender in evidence all disputed documents or
other exhibits referred to in the deposition.
(4) Real evidence shall he considered at the hearing.
(5) The Tribunal or Court may, at or before the hearing of a petition order or direct that evidence
orally particular fact be given at the hearing In such manner as may he specified by the order or
direction.
(6) the power conferred by sub-paragraph 5 of this paragraph extends in particular to Ordering or
directing that evidence of any Particular fact be given at the trial.
(a) by statement on oath of information or belief: or
(b) by the production of documents or entries in books: or
(c) by copies of documents or entries in books: or
(d) in the case of a fact which is of common knowledge either generally or in a particular district
by the production of a specified newspaper which contains a statement of that fact.
(7) The Tribunal or Court may. at or before tire hearing of a petition order or direct that the
number of witnesses who may be cal led at the hearing be limited as specified by the order or
direction.
(8) Save with leave of Tribunal or Court after an applicant has shown exceptional circumstances,
no document, plan, photograph or model shall be received in evidence at the hearing of a petition
unless it has been filed along with the petition or reply in accordance with these Directions.
(9) Such leave may be granted with costs save where in the circumstance the Tribunal or Court
considers it otherwise.

5.-(1) When a petition comes up for hearing and neither party appears, the Tribunal or Court
shall. unless there are good reasons to the contrary, strike out the petition, and no application
shall be brought or entertained to re-list it.
(2) When a petition comes up for hearing, if the petitioner appears and the respondent does not
appear, the petitioner may prove his petition so far as the burden of proof lies upon him and the
Tribunal or Court shall enter a final judgment in the petition.
(3) When a petition comes up for hearing. if the respondent appears and the petitioner does not
appear, the respondent shall be entitled to final judgment dismissing the petition.
(4) The party on whom the burden of proof lies by the nature of the issues or questions between
the patties shall begin.
(5) Documentary evidence shall be put in and may be read or taken as read by consent.
(6) A party shall close his case when he has concluded his evidence. Either the petitioner or
respondent may make oral application to have the case closed.
(7) Notwithstanding the provision of sub-paragraph (6) above. the Tribunal or Court may suomotu where it considers that either party fails to conclude its case within a reasonable time, close
that party’s case.
(S) The Secretary shall take charge of every document or objects put in as exhibit during the
hearing of a petition and shall mark or label every exhibit with a Idler or letters indicating the
party by whom the exhibit is put in (or where more convenient the witness by whom the exhibit
is proved) and with a number, so that all the exhibits put in by a party (or proved by a witness)
are numbered in one consecutive series.
(9) The Secretary shall cause a list of all the exhibits in the petition to be made, which when
completed shall form part of the record of the proceedings.
(10) For the purpose of the above sub-paragraph a bundle of documents may he treated and
counted as one exhibit.
(11) When the party beginning has concluded his evidence, if the other party does not intend to
call evidence the party beginning shall within 10 days after close of evidence file a written
address. Upon being served with the written address the other party shall within 7 days file his
own written address.
(12) Where the other party calls evidence he shall within 10 days after the close of its evidence
the a written address.
(13) Upon being served with other party’s written address the party beginning shall within 7 days
file his written address.

(14) The party who tiles the first address shall have a right of reply on points of law only. The
reply shall be filed within 5 days of to service of the other party’s address.
6-(1) No motion shall be moved. All motions shall conic up at the pre-hearing session except in
extreme circumstances with leave of Tribunal or Court.
(2) Where by these Directions any application is authorized to be made to Tribunal or Court,
such application shall be made by motion which may be supported by affidavit and shall state
under what rule or law the application is brought and shall be served on the respondent.
(3) Every such application shall be accompanied by a written address in support of the reliefs
sought.
(d) Where the respondent to the motion intends to oppose the application, he shall within 7 days
of the service on him of such application, file his written address and may accompany it with a
counter-affidavit.
(5) The applicant may on being served with the written address of the respondent file and serve
an address in reply on point of law within 3 days of being served. Where a counter-affidavit is
served on the application he may file further affidavit with his reply.
These Directions may be cited as Election Tribunal and Court Practice Directions 2007.
MADE at Abuja this 29th day of March, 2007
UMARU ABDULLAHI. CON
President Court of Appeal
ELECTION TRIBUNAL AND COURT PRACTICE DIRECTIONS, S.I.8 2007
RULE 21 FIRST SCHEDULE
FORM TF 007
IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ELECTION PETITION TRIBUNAL
HOLDEN AT........................................................
PETITION NO: ........................
Between
...... .... ...... Petitioner(s)
And

Respondent(s)
To.................................. (insert name of parties)
HEARING NOTICE FOR PRE-HEARING SESSION
Take Notice that you are required to attend the Tribunal/Court on the ..........day of
............20......... at 9 o’clock in the forenoon, for a Pre-Hearing Session for the purposes set out
hereunder:
(a) disposal of all matters which must or can be dealt with on interlocutory application;
(b) giving such directions as to the future course of the petition as appear best adapted to secure
its just, expeditious and economical disposal in view of the urgency of election petitions;
(c) giving directions on order of witnesses to be called and such documents to be tendered by
each party to prove their cases having in view the need to expeditious disposal of the petition;
(d) fixing clear dates for hearing of the petition.
2. Please answer the questions in the attached Pre-Hearing Information Sheet (Form TF 008) on
a separate sheet and submit 7 clear days before the above mentioned date.
Take Notice that if you do not attend in person or by Legal Practitioner at the time and place
mentioned such proceeding will he taken and such order will he made as the Tribunal or Court
may deem just and expedient.
DATED the................ day of................... ....20.........
Signed..................................... Secretary
ELECTION TRIBUNAL AND COURT PRACTICE DIRECTIONS S. I. 9 of 2007
RULE 21 FIRST SCHEDULE
FORM TF 008
ELECTORAL ACT 2006
IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ELECTION PETITION TRIBUNAL
HOLDEN AT . ........ ................. ..........
PETITION NO: ....................
Between

Petitioner’(s)
And
Respondent(s)
PRE-HEARING INFORMATION SHEET
This Pre-Hearing Information Sheet is intended to include reference to all applications which the
parties would wish to make at the Pre-Hearing Session. Applications not covered by the standard
questions raised in the Pre-Hearing Information Sheet should be entered under item 16 below.
All parties shall, not later than 7 days before the first Pre fearing Session, file and serve on all
panics.
(a) all applications in respect of matters to be dealt with before hearing including but not limited
to the matters listed hereunder;
(b) written answers to the questions contained in this Pre-Hearing Information Sheet.
I. Do you require that this action be consolidated with any other action(s)? It so give particulars.
2. Are amendments to a petition, reply or other process required’?
3. Are further and better particulars of any petition or reply required? if so, specify what
particulars are required.
4. If you intend to make any additional admissions. give details.
5. Are there witnesses you may now not wish to call.
6. Will interpreters be required for any witness? If so, state in what language.
7. Is this a case in which the use of a single or joint expert might be suitable? If not state reasons.
8. Is there any” way in which the Tribunal or Court can assist the parties to resolve their dispute
or particular issues in it without the need for a hearing or full hearing’?
9. Have you considered any lawful means of resolving or narrowing down the dispute or
particular issues in it’! If yes state the steps that have been taken. If not state reasons.
10. List the paragraph so the petition/reply you are admitting.
I I . List the documents you are consenting to.
12. List the documents you are disputing and the reasons for the dispute.

13. List the witnesses you feel may not be necessary for any party to call and state your reasons
for the opinion.
14. List the applications you wish to make at the Pre-Hearing Session.
DATED this ................ day of ........................20........
Signed.... .......................................... (legal Practitioner for the............)
FOR SERVICE ON
ELECTION TRIBUNAL AND COURT PRACTICE DIRECTIONS S. I. 10 of 2007
RULE 21 FIRST SCHEDULE
FORM TF 007
ELECTORAL ACT 2006
IN THE GOVERNORSHIP ELECTION PETITION TRIBUNAL
HOLDEN AT_
.........................
PETITION NO .............................
Between
............................. petitioner(s)...... )
And
Respondent
To ............................. (insert name of parties)
HEARING NOTICE FOR PRE-HEARING SESSION
Take Notice that you are required to attend the Tribunal/Court on the .........day of
.......................................20 . at 9. o’clock in the I forenoon, for a Pre-Hearing Session for the
purposes set out hereunder:
I (a) disposal of all matters which roust or can be dealt with on interlocutory application;

(b) giving such directions as to the future course of the petition as appear best adapted to secure
its just. expeditious and economical disposal in view of the urgency of election petitions:
(c) giving directions on order of witnesses to be called and such document to be tendered by each
party to prove their cases having in view the need to expeditious disposal of the petition:
(d) fixing clear dates for hearing of the petition.
2. Please answer the questions in the attached Pre-Hearing Information Sheet (Form TF 008) on
a separate sheet and submit 7 clear days before the above mentioned date.
Take Notice that if you do not attend in person or by Legal Practitioner at the time and place
mentioned such proceeding will be taken and such order will be made as the Tribunal or Court
may deem just and expedient.
DATED the ...........day of ................................. 20.......
Signed: ............................................. Secretary
ELECTION TRIBUNAL AND COURT PRACTICE DIRECTIONS S. I. 11 of 2007
RULE 21 FIRST SCHEDULE FORM TF 008 ELECTORAL ACT 2006
IN THE GOVERNORSHIP ELECTION PETITION
TRIBUNAL
HOLDEN AT_
.........................
PETITION NO .............................
Between
............................. petitioner(s)...... )
And
Respondent
PRE-HEARING INFORMATION SHEET
This Pre-Hearing Information Sheet is intended to include reference to all applications which the
parties would wish to make at the PreHearing Session. Applications not covered by the standard
questions raised in this PreHearing Information Sheet should be entered under item 16 below.

All parties Shall not later than 7 days before the first PreHearing Session, file and serve on all
patties:
(a) all applications in respect of matters to be dealt with before hearing including but not limited
to the matters listed hereunder
(b) written answers to the questions contained in this PreHearing Information Sheet.
1. Do you require that this action be consolidated with any other action(s)? if so give particulars.
2. Are amendments to a petition, reply or other process required’?
3. Are further and better particulars of any petition or reply required’? If so specify what
particulars are required.
4. If you intend to make any additional admissions, give details.
5. Are there witnesses you may now not wish to call.
6. Will interpreters be required for any witness? If so, state in what language.
7. Is this a case in which the use of a single or joint expert might be suitable? If not state reasons.
8. Is there any way in which the Tribunal or Court can assist the parties to resolve their dispute or
particular issues in it without the need for a hearing or full hearing?
9. Have you considered any lawful means of resolving or narrowing down the dispute or
particular issues in it? If yes state the steps that have been taken. If not state reasons.
10. List the paragraphs of the petition/reply you are admitting.
11. List the documents you are consenting to.
12. List the documents you are disputing and the reasons for the dispute.
13. List the witnesses you feel may not be necessary for any party to call and state your reasons
for the opinion.
14. List the applications you wish to make at the Pre-Hearing Session.
Dated this .... ......... ...day of .....................................20......
Signed: ............................................... (Legal Practitioner for the............ ............... )
FOR SERVICE ON:

ELECTION TRIBUNAL AND COURT PRACTICE DIRECTIONS S. I. 12 of 2007

RULE 21 FIRST SCHEDULE
FORM TF 007 ELECTORAL ACT 2006
IN THE LEGISLATIVE HOUSES ELECTION PETITION TRIBUNAL
HOLDEN AT ... ........ ................. ...........
PETITION NO: ............................
Between
............................. petitioner(s)...... )
And
Respondent
To.... ..................... . . ............... (insert name of parties)
HEARING NOTICE FOR PRE-HEARING SESSION
Take Notice that you are required to attend the Tribunal/Court on the ..................day of . .............
......... 20 . ... at 9. o’clock in the forenoon. for a Pre-Healing Session for the Purposes set out
hereunder:
I(a) disposal of all matters which must or can be dealt with on interlocutory application:
(b) giving such directions as to the future course of the petition as appear best adapted to secure
its just, expeditious and economical disposal in view of the urgency of election petitions;
(c) giving directions on order of witnesses to be called and such documents to be tendered by
each party to prove their cases having in view the need to expeditious disposal of the petition; (d)
fixing clear dates for hearing of the petition.
2. Please answer the questions in the attached Pre-Hearing Information Sheet (Form TF 008) on
a separate sheet and submit 7 clear days before the above mentioned date.
Take Notice that if you do not attend in person or by Legal Practitioner at the time and place
mentioned such proceeding will be taken and such order will be made as the Tribunal or Court
may deem just and expedient.
Dated the...... ......-..day of ................................. 20- ...

Signed: ...................................................
Secretary
ELECTION TRIBUNAL AND COURT PRACTICE DIRECTIONS S. 1. 13 OF 2007
RULE 21 FIRST SCHEDULE
FORM TF 008
ELECTORAL ACT 2006
IN THE LEGISLATIVE HOUSES ELECTION PETITION TRIBUNAL
HOLDEN AT .. .......... .......... .............
PETITION NO:. ............................
Between
Petitioner(s)
And
Respondent(s)
PRE-HEARING INFORMATION SHEET
This Pre-hearing Information Sheet is intended to include reference to all applications which the
parties would wish to make at the Pre-Hearing Session. Applications not covered by the standard
questions raised in this Pre- Hearing Information Sheet should be entered under item 16 below.
All parties shall, not later than 7 days before the first PreHearing Session file and serve on all
parties:
(a) all applications in respect of matters to be dealt with before heating including but not limited
to the matters listed Hereunder:
(b) written answers to the questions contained in this PreHearing Information Sheet.
I. Do you require that this action be consolidated with any other action(s)’? If so giye particulars.
2. Are amendments to a petition, reply or other process required’.’
3. Are further and better particulars of any petition or reply required if so. specify what
particulars are required.

4. If you intend to make any additional admissions, give details.
5. are there witnesses you may now not wish to call
6. Will interpreters be required for any witness? If so, state in what language.
7. Is this a case in which the use of a single or joint expert might be suitable? If not state reasons.
8. Is there any way in which the Tribunal or court can assist the parties to resolve their dispute or
particular issues in it without the need for a hearing or full hearing?
9. Have you considered any lawful means of resolving or narrowing down the dispute or
particular issues init? If yes state thc steps that have been taken. If not state reasons.
10. List the paragraphs of the petition/reply you are admitting.
11. List the documents you are consenting to.
12. List the documents you are disputing and the reasons for the dispute.
13. List the witnesses you feel may not be necessary for any party to call and state your reasons
for the opinion.
14. List the applications you wish to make at the Pre-Hearing Session.
Dated this............ ...day of.... ........... ....... 20 ...
Signed ................................ (Legal Practitioner for the ..........................
FOR SERVICE ON:
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA, 1999
ELECTION TRIBUNAL AND COURT PRACTICE AMENDMENT DIRECTIONS, 2007
Commencement: 3"” April, 2007
In the exercise of the powers conferred on me by Section 285 (3) of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999. Paragraph 50 of the First Schedule to the Electoral Act 2006
and by virtue of all other powers enabling the fit that behalf, I. Umaru Abdullahi CON. President
Court of Appeal, hereby issue the following Practice Directions:
1. Sub-paragraph (a) and (b) (I) of paragraph I of the Election Tribunal and Court Practice
Directions 2007 is hereby amended as follows (i) In sub-paragraph (a) (I) delete the words

“list of all the witnesses” and substitute therefor the words .1 statement indicating the number of witnesses the petitioner intends”
(ii) In sub-paragraph (h) (I) delete the comma and immediately thereafter insert the words
“whose identity may be represented by an alphabet or a combination thereof”.
These Directions may be cited as Election Tribunal and Court Practice (Amendment Directions),
2007
MADE at Abuja this 10th day of May. 2007